The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Physical Training of Children, by Pye
Henry Chavasse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Physical Training of Children

Author: Pye Henry Chavasse

Contributor: F. H. Gretchell

Release Date: May 05, 2021 [eBook #65260]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Richard Tonsing, MFR, and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHYSICAL TRAINING OF
CHILDREN ***

[Illustration: AT HOME.]




                                  THE
                           PHYSICAL TRAINING
                                   OF
                               CHILDREN.


                            BY P. H. CHAVASSE,

    FELLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS OF ENGLAND; FELLOW OF THE
   OBSTETRICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON; FORMERLY PRESIDENT OF QUEEN’S COLLEGE
  MEDICO CHIRURGICAL SOCIETY, BIRMINGHAM; AUTHOR OF “ADVICE TO A WIFE ON
              THE MANAGEMENT OF HER OWN HEALTH,” ETC., ETC.

                                   WITH

                       A PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION,

                         BY F. H. GETCHELL, M.D.,

 CLINICAL LECTURER ON THE DISEASES OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT THE JEFFERSON
 MEDICAL COLLEGE, OBSTETRICIAN TO THE CATHARINE STREET DISPENSARY, FELLOW
  OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, AND MEMBER OF THE PATHOLOGICAL SOCIETY,
    PHILADELPHIA; CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE GYNŒCOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF
    BOSTON; AUTHOR OF “THE MATERNAL MANAGEMENT OF INFANCY,” ETC., ETC.

[Illustration]

                           PHILADELPHIA, PA.:
                     NEW-WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY,
                   MIDDLETOWN, CONN.: PARMELEE & CO.
                     BURLINGTON, IOWA: R. T. ROOT.
                                 1871.




       Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1871, by
                     NEW-WORLD PUBLISHING COMPANY,
                  (JOHN C. COPPER.—S. J. VANDERSLOOT,)
    In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C.




                               CONTENTS.


                                INFANCY.

                                                 PAGE
                   PRELIMINARY CONVERSATION        17
                   ABLUTION                        19
                   MANAGEMENT OF THE NAVEL         26
                   CLOTHING                        29
                   DIET                            33
                   VACCINATION                     53
                   DENTITION                       58
                   EXERCISE                        69
                   SLEEP                           71
                   THE BLADDER AND THE BOWELS      76
                   AILMENTS, DISEASE, ETC.         77
                   CONCLUDING REMARKS ON INFANCY  106


                               CHILDHOOD.

                   ABLUTION                       108
                   CLOTHING                       111
                   DIET                           118
                   THE NURSERY                    133
                   EXERCISE                       151
                   AMUSEMENTS                     155
                   EDUCATION                      160
                   SLEEP                          164
                   SECOND DENTITION               169
                   DISEASE, ETC.                  170
                   WARM BATHS                     253
                   WARM EXTERNAL APPLICATIONS     254
                   ACCIDENTS                      256


                         BOYHOOD AND GIRLHOOD.

                   ABLUTION, ETC.                 274
                   CLOTHING                       282
                   DIET                           286
                   AIR AND EXERCISE               290
                   AMUSEMENTS                     294
                   EDUCATION                      298
                   HOUSEHOLD WORK FOR GIRLS       305
                   CHOICE OF PROFESSION OR TRADE  305
                   SLEEP                          308
                   ON THE TEETH AND THE GUMS      313
                   PREVENTION OF DISEASE, ETC.    315


                   INDEX                          347




                             INTRODUCTION.


Nothing is more to be regretted than the fact that the females of this
country grow up to womanhood in entire ignorance of all that relates to
their future condition as parents, and the physical and mental
development of the young for whose welfare they may yet be so deeply
responsible. “It is not to be wondered at that when the young wife finds
herself a mother, she is kept in a state of painful alarm and
apprehension by the most trifling occurrence, or allows real danger to
steal on in a state of the most fatal, because unguarded, security.” The
alarming mortality of childhood, amounting to nearly half the children
born, before the age of five years is reached, leads us to inquire
whether it is an unavoidable fatality of our race, and therefore must be
patiently submitted to, or is to a great extent the result of ignorance
on the part of those to whom the care of the infant man is intrusted?

The perfection of the human frame, and its admirable adaptation to
external nature, together with the fact that the preservation or
destruction of life in infancy bears a marked and direct relation to the
nature of the treatment to which the young being is subjected, solves
the question beyond the possibility of a doubt.

The want of success in the management of the infant cannot be charged to
neglect on the part of the parent, for “the kindest feelings flow out
instinctively towards a helpless offspring.”

             “Morning and evening thou hast watched the bee
             Go forth on her errand of industry;
             The bee for herself hath gathered and toiled,
             But the mother’s toils are for her child.”

The sole cause of the difficulty is that the mother has never been
instructed,—no pains has been taken to teach her, and she has neglected
to inform herself, and now that she finds the life and welfare of her
offspring dependent on her care and management, she applies to her
friends for assistance and receives advice of so contradictory a nature
that she is ready to give up in despair. It is to relieve mothers from
this dilemma, which is one frequently observed by the physician, that
the author gives the advice and instruction contained in this volume;
and most admirably has he succeeded in his very difficult undertaking to
write on a subject so little understood as physical education, and make
it perfectly clear to the understanding of all.

J. F. P. Richter says of children: “I would create a world specially for
myself and suspend it under the mildest sun; a little world where I
would have nothing but little lovely children, and these little things I
would never suffer to grow up, but only to play eternally. If a seraph
were weary of heaven, or his golden pinions drooped, I would send him to
dwell a month upon my happy infant world; and no angel, so long as he
saw their innocence, could lose his own.”

The arrangement of the book is in the form of questions and answers.
This is an excellent idea, the long experience of the author, as a
physician, enabling him to suggest many important questions that would
escape the inexperienced mother or nurse.

The first chapter treats of the management of the infant from the moment
of its birth; and, although the care of the infant is not intrusted to
the mother at this time, it is very important that she should know just
how it should be managed, and she will then be able to instruct her
nurse, and prevent her carrying into execution many of the hobbies of
which old nurses are often very fond. The most of them are founded on
error, and may be of the greatest injury to the infant at this tender
period of its existence. For instance, the author tells us that the
infant should be put to the mother’s breast soon after its birth, and
should receive food of no other kind. Now there is the strongest desire
on the part of many nurses to feed the child with some one of the many
preparations used for this purpose as soon as it is dressed, or, at any
rate, before the mother’s milk makes its appearance—forgetting that
nature has made no mistake in her affairs here, and will not be
interfered with without requiring the poor victim to pay the
penalty;—and so we find that if the child’s stomach be filled with pap,
gruel, or anything of the kind, the result will be acidity, griping,
colic, and vomiting, and you will have made a bad beginning by
interfering with nature, instead of a good one by leaving her alone. In
very many cases the harm is done by trying to assist nature, and, on
account of an ignorance of the natural laws, the intended assistance
becomes a positive interference; and it is in view of this fact that the
author tells us what not to do, as well as what to do; and whenever the
mother is in doubt as to her course, she has only to turn to the chapter
treating of the subject under consideration, and her mind is at once
relieved.

Full instruction is given in regard to the clothing of infants. And
nothing is more important; for one would suppose we should find deaths
from pulmonary complaints, such as pneumonia and bronchitis, more
frequent in adult life,—our occupations being of such a nature as to
constantly expose us to the vicissitudes of the weather,—but the
opposite is the fact, and the mortality from these diseases is far
greater during childhood. The sources from which animal heat is derived,
are smallest at birth, and increase till the child is full grown; but,
instead of realizing this fact, and protecting the child with sufficient
clothing, it is supposed to be comfortable when large portions of the
body are entirely uncovered, while the parents find much more clothing
requisite for both comfort and health—and the result is that many
perish, and others are compelled to go on through life with impaired
constitutions, for the condition of the pulmonary organs in after life
depends, to a very great extent, on the treatment the person received
during the tender period of infancy.

                                  “’Tis the work
      Of many a dark hour and of many a prayer
      To bring the heart back from an infant gone.”—N. P. WILLIS.

After a few months the child requires other food than that derived from
the mother, and it is of great importance that no mistake be made in the
kind of food given the child; for, as we have already seen that the
condition of the pulmonary organs of the adult depends to a very great
extent upon the clothing of the infant, so will the condition of the
digestive organs depend upon the selection of the food for the infant at
this period of its existence, and if it be of the proper character all
will be well, but if, as is too often the case, the food given be of an
indigestible nature, the ground-work of dyspepsia is laid, and it will
torment the unfortunate creature as long as he lives. In a great
majority of cases children are given table-food far too early, and
nothing is more common than to be told by the mother that her child
grows “thinner and thinner,” though she is giving it all the meat it
will eat. Now, our author shows us that the reason the child does not
thrive is because its digestive organs are not far enough advanced to
extract the nutriment from food of this kind, but that it irritates, and
is a positive injury to the infant. And he then explains the important
fact that the child does not thrive on that kind of food that contains
the most nutriment itself, but on that which is best adapted to the
condition of the digestive organs at the time it is given. And then he
tells us what that is, and takes us on from step to step, making all the
changes necessary in the diet throughout the entire period of infancy
and childhood. He also calls our attention to those articles of food
that are indigestible at all times, and gives many important directions
in regard to the preparation of the food, time for giving it, and the
amount that should be given.

Perhaps no part of the work is more important than the instruction given
in regard to the raising of children by hand (as it is called); for here
the life of the infant may be said to depend, to a very great extent,
upon the treatment it receives from those who have it in charge, and it
is for this reason that the author has been very explicit in his
instructions. He has, in fact, left nothing to be wished for; he gives
the minutest directions as to the kind of food, the mode of preparation,
the time for feeding, and the general management of the infant who is so
unfortunate as to be deprived of the sustenance nature intended for its
support. The wet-nurse comes in, also, for her share of attention, and
we are told how to select one, and rules are laid down for her diet,
exercise, etc. And it is not a matter of indifference whether these
rules are attended to or not; for, on the condition of the health of the
nurse will depend the character of her milk, and of course we cannot
expect a child to be healthy that receives impure milk from its nurse.

Very important instruction is given for our guidance in the management
of the child when sick. Everything relating to the sick-room is fully
discussed, and the most minute directions given for the assistance of
the mother at this critical period of the child’s existence.

Considerable space is taken with prescriptions and the administration of
medicine, which is of much value to those not within the reach of the
family physician. But if the child is sick the physician should always
be notified at once, if it be possible, for much depends upon the early
treatment of the disease; and in no case should the limited knowledge of
the mother be substituted for that of the experienced physician. It must
be remembered that this book is not intended exclusively for those who
are always within the reach of a physician, but it is also for the
guidance and assistance of whose who are far from, or unable to obtain,
medical advice, and to those located on the frontier, and at the
missionary stations, this part of the work has proved to be of the
greatest advantage.

Sound advice is given in regard to dosing children with many quack
cordials, carminatives, and syrups, that fill the shops, all of which
are advertised to contain no opium, and yet the busy practitioner hardly
passes a month without being called to attend a child dangerously
narcotized by some one of these preparations.

It is to induce sleep that these preparations are given, the mother not
being aware that if an anodyne be used to-day, a larger dose will be
required to-morrow to produce the same effect, and also that by its
interference with digestion the habitual use of narcotics always injures
the health of the child. For these reasons laudanum, paregoric, or any
preparations containing opium in any form, should never be given to the
infant, unless under the control of a physician.

The management of the nursery is not overlooked, and very judicious
rules for selecting, warming, and ventilating the apartment are given.
As the child advances, the teeth begin to make their appearance, and
this is always a source of more or less irritation; but, by a little
care at this time, the child passes through it with little discomfort,
and serious consequences are avoided. The importance of proper
regulation of the diet, and the soothing effect of fresh air upon the
irritated nervous system at this time, cannot be over-estimated.

The modes of exercising the child are explained, and as the development
of the muscular system depends to so great an extent on judicious
exercise, no mother should fail to become acquainted with the
instruction given on this subject.

The infant man, like the adult one, is a creature of habit, and, with a
little systematic training, it is very easy to form good habits,
provided you begin early; but, if you delay until bad habits have been
formed, it then becomes an entirely different matter. In the simple
operation of getting the child to sleep, the difficulty experienced is
generally the result of not beginning with it until bad habits have been
formed. It is just as easy for the infant to go to sleep at a regular
time every day by being placed quietly in the bed, as it is for it to go
to sleep after being patted, trotted, and walked about the room for an
hour or two; but, if it is walked to-day, of course it will expect it
to-morrow. The ill effects of this kind of treatment, together with the
way in which it is to be avoided, the author has plainly given us.

Bathing, if properly conducted, is always agreeable, and of advantage to
the child, and mothers often ask how often they should bathe their
children, and whether in warm or cold water, and, as even the bathing of
the child may be done improperly, directions are given which should
always be followed. The child may be bathed too often, or not often
enough, or in an improper manner. For instance, it may be seated in a
bath-tub with the water half way up the body, and then water splashed up
over the shoulders, leaving the chest subjected to the chilling effects
of evaporation, and material harm may thereby result.

The amusement of the child very properly comes in for a share of the
author’s attention. All parents should realize the importance of making
the child’s home cheerful, and should not forget that the happiness of
the child has much to do with its health and the development of its
mental nature. It is astonishing at how small an expense, with a little
contrivance, the gloomy, quiet nursery may be converted into a cheerful,
happy one, and a small plot of ground into a full-sized farm in the mind
of the infant farmer.

            “Oh! happy age, when harmless pleasures please,
            Gay as the lark, and fickle as the breeze:
            Well may we sigh, in after years of pain,
            To think that hour will never come again.
            How small the grief that dims the sunny eye—
            How light the thoughtless tear—how quickly dry;
            A toy, a butterfly, thy smiles renew,
            As from the flow’r the sunbeams chase the dew.”

Parents are too apt to overlook these, to them, unimportant little
things, and it is for this reason that the author calls attention to it,
and shows us that rational amusements not only develop the physical, but
exert an immense influence on the intellect of the child.

The views of the author in regard to the education of the child are
clearly given. In this country children are sent to school far too
young. The mind is overtaxed before the body has had time to develop,
and a debilitated constitution is too often the result. It is of little
consequence whether a child reads at six years or not until it is ten.
First develop the physical, then at the proper time the vigorous
intellect will climb the hill of knowledge, leaving far behind the
student whose constitution was destroyed by overcrowding the brain
during the tender age of childhood.

“The main design of nature in early youth, is _not_ the speedy
development of the mind,—for she has designedly, as it were, withheld
this agent,—but the development and growth of the body, by means of the
nutritive functions so carefully provided for the purpose. All the
energies of the constitution are then required for the promotion of this
object; and if the brain be then cultivated too assiduously, these
energies are abstracted from their legitimate purpose, and physical
debility, ending most probably in disease and decay is produced. Does it
not thus clearly and manifestly appear, that premature and too exclusive
mental cultivation is to thwart nature by interfering with her
operations in the careful development of the physical constitution of
youth?”

It was the opinion of Rosseau “that the chief art of education in
childhood is _to lose time_; that every delay should be considered an
advantage, care being taken not to give that instruction to-day which
may be deferred, without danger, till to-morrow.” The same writer says:
“The most critical interval of human life is that between the hour of
birth and twelve years of age. This is the time wherein vice and error
take root, without our being possessed of any instrument to destroy
them; and when the implement is found they are so deeply grounded that
they are no longer to be eradicated.

“If children took a leap from their mother’s breast and at once arrived
at the age of reason, the methods of education now usually taken with
them would be very proper; but, according to the progress of nature,
they require those which are very different. We should not tamper with
the mind till it has acquired all its faculties; for it is impossible it
should perceive the light we hold out to it while it is blind, or that
it should pursue, over an immense plain of ideas, that route which
reason hath so slightly traced as to be perceptible only to the sharpest
sight.

“The first part of education, therefore, ought to be purely negative. It
consists neither in teaching virtue nor truth, but in guarding the heart
from vice and the mind from error.”

         “Meantime a smiling offspring rises round,
         And mingles both their graces. By degrees,
         The human blossom blows; and every day,
         Soft as it rolls along, shows some new charm—
         The father’s luster, and the mother’s bloom.”
                                             THOMSON’S SEASONS.

After this brief review, the only conclusion that we can come to is,
that everything depends upon a proper system of physical training.
Without a systematic development of the physical frame, a healthful and
vigorous intellectual condition need not be looked for. The mental and
the physical parts of education are as inseparable as the action of the
mind from that of the bodily organs—they are created for and adapted to
each other, and so sympathize as to form an harmonious whole. Now, if
the mothers of the land will give their attention to the subject of
Physical Education, the mortality of childhood will decrease, the
condition of mankind improve, enjoyment be promoted, and, by enabling
all to cultivate the higher faculties and affections, the human family
will effect the nearest approach to perfection that it is possible to
attain on earth.

                                                  F. H. GETCHELL,
                                              1432 Spruce Street, Phila.

 _October, 1870._




                                INFANCY.


  _I hardly know so melancholy a reflection, as that Parents are
  necessarily the sole directors of the management of Children; whether
  they have, or have not judgment, penetration, or taste, to perform the
  task._—GREVILLE.

  _Man’s breathing Miniature!_—COLERIDGE.




                       PRELIMINARY CONVERSATION.


1. _I wish to consult you on many subjects appertaining to the
management and the care of children,—will you favor me with your advice
and counsel?_

I shall be happy to accede to your request, and to give you the fruits
of my experience in the clearest manner I am able, and in the simplest
language I can command—freed from all technicalities. I will endeavor to
guide you in the management of the health of your offspring;—I will
describe to you the _symptoms_ of the diseases of children;—I will warn
you of approaching danger, in order that you may promptly apply for
medical assistance before disease has gained too firm a footing;—I will
give you the _treatment_ on the moment of some of their more pressing
illnesses—when medical aid cannot quickly be procured, and where delay
may be death;—I will instruct you in case of accidents, on the
_immediate_ employment of remedies—where procrastination may be
dangerous; I will tell you how a sick child should be nursed, and how a
sick room ought to be managed;—I will use my best energy to banish
injurious practices from the nursery;—I will treat of the means to
prevent disease where it be possible;—I will show you the way to
preserve the health of the healthy,—and how to strengthen the
delicate;—and will strive to make a medical man’s task more agreeable to
himself,—and more beneficial to his patient,—by dispelling errors and
prejudices, and by proving the importance of your _strictly_ adhering to
his rules. If I can accomplish any of these objects, I shall be amply
repaid by the pleasing satisfaction that I have been of some little
service to the rising generation.

2. _Then you consider it important that I should be made acquainted
with, and be well informed upon, the subjects you have just named?_

Certainly. I deem it to be your imperative duty to _study_ the subject
well. The proper management of children is a vital question,—a mother’s
question,—and the most important that can be brought under the
consideration of a parent; and, strange to say, it is one that has been
more neglected than any other. How many mothers undertake the
responsible management of children without previous instruction, or
without forethought; they undertake it as though it may be learned
either by intuition or by instinct or by affection! The consequence is,
that frequently they are in a sea of trouble and uncertainty, tossing
about without either rule or compass; until, too often, their hopes and
treasures are shipwrecked and lost!

The care and management, and consequently the health and future
well-doing of the child, principally devolve upon the mother; “for it is
the mother after all that has most to do with the making or the marring
of the man.” Dr. Guthrie justly remarks that—“Moses might never have
been the man he was unless he had been nursed by his own mother. How
many celebrated men have owed their greatness and their goodness to a
mother’s training!” Napoleon owed much to his mother. “‘The fate of a
child,’ said Napoleon, ‘is always the work of his mother;’ and this
extraordinary man took pleasure in repeating, that to his mother he owed
his elevation. All history confirms this opinion.... The character of
the mother influences the children more than that of the father, because
it is more exposed to their daily, hourly observation.”

I am not overstating the importance of the subject in hand when I say
that a child is the most valuable treasure in the world, that “he is the
precious gift of God,” that he is the source of a mother’s greatest and
purest enjoyment, that he is the strongest bond of affection between her
and her husband, and that

            “A babe in a house is a well-spring of pleasure,
            A messenger of peace and love.”

In the writing of the following pages I have had one object constantly
in view—namely, health—

        “That salt of life, which does to all a relish give;
        Its standing pleasure, and intrinsic wealth,
        The body’s virtue, and the soul’s good fortune—health.”




                               ABLUTION.


3. _Is a new-born infant, for the first time, to be washed in warm or in
cold water?_

It is not an uncommon plan to use _cold_ water from the first, under the
impression of its strengthening the child. This appears to be a cruel
and barbarous practice, and is likely to have a contrary tendency.
Moreover, it frequently produces either inflammation of the eyes, or
stuffing of the nose, or inflammation of the lungs, or looseness of the
bowels. Although I do not approve of _cold_ water, we ought not to run
into an opposite extreme, as _hot_ water would weaken and enervate the
babe, and thus would predispose him to disease. Lukewarm _rain_ water
will be the best to wash him with. This, if it be summer, should have
its temperature gradually lowered, until it be quite cold; if it be
winter, a _dash_ of warm water ought still to be added, to take off the
chill.

It will be necessary to use soap—Castile soap being the best for the
purpose—it being less irritating to the skin than the ordinary soap.
Care should be taken that it does not get into the eyes, as it may
produce either inflammation or smarting of those organs.

If the skin be delicate, or if there be any excoriation or
“breaking-out” on the skin, then Glycerin soap, instead of the Castile
soap, ought to be used.

4. _At what age do you recommend a mother to commence washing her infant
in the tub or in the nursery-basin?_

As soon as the naval-string comes away. Do not be afraid of water,—and
that in plenty,—as it is one of the best strengtheners to a child’s
constitution. How many infants suffer, for the want of water, from
excoriation!

A nursery-basin (Wedgwood’s make is considered the best) holding either
six or eight quarts of water, and which will be sufficiently large to
hold the whole body of the child. The basin is generally fitted into a
wooden frame, which will raise it to a convenient height for the washing
of the baby.

Sir Charles Locock strongly recommends that an infant should be washed
_in a tub_ from the _very_ commencement. He says: “All those that I
superintend _begin_ with a tub.”—_Letter to the Author._

5. _Which do you prefer—flannel or sponge—to wash a child with?_

For the first part of the washing a piece of flannel is very useful—that
is to say, to use with the soap, and to loosen the dirt and the
perspiration; but for the finishing-up process, a sponge—a large
sponge—is superior to flannel, to wash all away, and to complete the
bathing. A sponge cleanses and gets into all the nooks, corners, and
crevices of the skin. Besides, sponge, to finish up with, is softer and
more agreeable to the tender skin of a child than flannel. Moreover, a
sponge holds more water than flannel, and thus enables you to stream the
water more effectually over him. A large sponge will act like a
miniature shower bath, and will thus brace and strengthen him.

6. _To prevent a new-born babe from catching cold, is it necessary to
wash his head with brandy?_

It is _not_ necessary. The idea that it will prevent cold is erroneous,
as the rapid evaporation of heat which the brandy causes is more likely
to give than to prevent cold.

7. _Ought that tenacious, paste-like substance, adhering to the skin of
a new-born babe, to be washed off at the first dressing?_

It should, provided it be done with a soft sponge and with care. If
there be any difficulty in removing the substance, gently rub it, by
means of a flannel, either with a little lard, or fresh butter, or sweet
oil. After the parts have been well smeared and gently rubbed with the
lard, or oil, or butter, let all be washed off together, and be
thoroughly cleansed away, by means of a sponge and soap and warm water,
and then, to complete the process, gently put him for a minute or two in
his tub. If this paste-like substance be allowed to remain on the skin,
it might produce either an excoriation or a “breaking-out.” Besides, it
is impossible, if that tenacious substance be allowed to remain on it,
for the skin to perform its proper functions.

Mrs. Baines (who has written so much and so well on the Management of
Children), in a _Letter_ to the Author, recommends flannel to be used in
the _first_ washing of an infant, which flannel ought afterward to be
burned; and that the sponge should be only used to complete the process,
to clear off what the flannel had already loosened. She also recommends
that every child should have his own sponge, each of which should have a
particular distinguishing mark upon it, as she considers the promiscuous
use of the same sponge to be a frequent cause of _ophthalmia_
(inflammation of the eyes). The sponges cannot be kept too clean.

8. _Have you any general observations to make on the washing of a
new-born infant?_

A babe ought, every morning of his life, to be thoroughly washed from
head to foot; and this can only be properly done by putting him bodily
either into a tub, or into a bath, or into a large nursery-basin half
filled with water. The head, before placing him in the bath, should be
first wetted (but not dried); then immediately put him into the water,
and, with a piece of flannel well soaked, cleanse his whole body,
particularly his armpits, between his thighs, his groins, and his hams;
then take a large sponge in hand, and allow the water from it, well
filled, to stream all over his body, particularly over his back and
loins. Let this advice be well observed, and you will find the plan most
strengthening to your child. The skin must, after every bath, be
thoroughly but quickly dried with warm, dry, soft towels, first
enveloping the child in one, and then gently absorbing the moisture with
the towel, not roughly scrubbing and rubbing his tender skin as though a
horse were being rubbed down.

The ears must after each ablution be carefully and well dried with a
soft dry napkin; inattention to this advice has sometimes caused a
gathering in the ear—a painful and distressing complaint; and at other
times it has produced deafness.

Directly after the infant is dried, all the parts that are at all likely
to be chafed ought to be well powdered. After he is well dried and
powdered, the chest, the back, the bowels, and the limbs should be
gently rubbed, taking care not to expose him unnecessarily during such
friction.

He ought to be partially washed every evening; indeed it may be
necessary to use a sponge and a little warm water frequently during the
day, namely, each time after the bowels have been relieved. _Cleanliness
is one of the grand incentives to health_, and therefore cannot be too
strongly insisted upon. If more attention were paid to this subject,
children would be more exempt from chafings, “breakings-out,” and
consequent suffering, than they at present are. After the second month,
if the babe be delicate, the addition of two handfuls of table salt to
the water he is washed with in the morning will tend to brace and
strengthen him.

With regard to the best powder to dust an infant with, there is nothing
better for general use than starch—the old-fashioned starch _made of
wheaten flour_—reduced by means of a pestle and mortar to a fine powder;
or Violet Powder, which is nothing more than finely-powdered starch
scented, and which may be procured of any respectable chemist. Some
mothers are in the habit of using white lead; but as this is a poison,
it ought _on no account_ to be resorted to. In one case related by Koop
(_Journ. de Pharm._, xx. 603), a child was destroyed by it.

9. _If the parts about the groin and fundament be excoriated, what is
then the best application?_

After sponging the parts with tepid _rain_ water, holding him over his
tub, and allowing the water from a well-filled sponge to stream over the
parts, and then drying them with a soft napkin (not rubbing, but gently
dabbing with the napkin), there is nothing better than dusting the parts
frequently with finely-powdered Native Carbonate of Zinc. The best way
of using this powder is, tying up a little of it in a piece of muslin,
and then gently dabbing the parts with it.

Remember excoriations are generally owing to the want of water—to the
want of an abundance of water. An infant who is every morning well
soused and well swilled with water, seldom suffers either from
excoriations or from any other of the numerous skin diseases.
Cleanliness, then, is the grand preventive of, and the best remedy for,
excoriations. Naaman the Syrian was ordered “to wash and be clean,” and
he was healed, “and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little
child, and he was clean.” This was, of course, a miracle; but how often
does water, without any special intervention, act miraculously both in
preventing and in curing skin diseases!

An infant’s clothes, napkins especially, ought never to be washed with
soda; the washing of napkins with soda is apt to produce excoriations
and breakings-out. “As washerwomen often deny that they use soda, it can
be easily detected by simply soaking a clean napkin in fresh water and
then tasting the water; if it be brackish and salt, soda has been
employed.” [Communicated by Sir Charles Locock to the Author.]

10. _Who is the proper person to wash and dress the babe?_

The monthly nurse, as long as she is in attendance; but afterward the
mother, unless she should happen to have an experienced, sensible,
thoughtful nurse, which, unfortunately, is seldom the case. [“The
Princess of Wales might have been seen on Thursday taking an airing, in
a brougham in Hyde Park, with her baby—the future King of England—on her
lap, without a nurse, and accompanied only by Mrs. Bruce. The Princess
seems a very pattern of mothers, and it is whispered among the ladies of
the Court that every evening the mother of this young gentleman may be
seen in a flannel dress, in order that she may properly wash and put on
baby’s night-clothes and see him safely in bed. It is a pretty subject
for a picture.”—_Pall Mall Gazette._]

11. _What is the best kind of apron for a mother, or for a nurse to
wear, while washing the infant?_

Flannel—a good, thick, soft flannel, usually called bath-coating—apron,
made long and full, and which of course ought to be well dried every
time before it is used.

12. _Perhaps you will kindly recapitulate, and give me further advice on
the subject of the ablution of my babe?_

Let him by all means, then, as soon as the navel-string has separated
from the body, be bathed either _in_ his tub, or _in_ his bath, or _in_
his large nursery-basin; for if he is to be strong and hearty, _in_ the
water every morning he must go. The water ought to be slightly warmer
than new milk. It is dangerous for him to remain for a long period in
his bath; this, of course, holds good in a tenfold degree if the child
has either a cold, or a pain in his bowels. Take care that, immediately
after he comes out of his tub, he is well dried with warm towels. It is
well to let him have his bath the first thing in the morning, and before
he has been put to the breast; let him be washed before he has his
breakfast; it will refresh him and give him an appetite. Besides, he
ought to have his morning ablution on an empty stomach, or it may
interfere with digestion, and might produce sickness and pain. In
putting him in his tub, let his head be the first part washed. We all
know, that in bathing in the sea, how much better we can bear the water
if we first wet our head; if we do not do so, we feel shivering and
starved and miserable. Let there be no dawdling in the washing; let it
be quickly over. When he is thoroughly dried with warm _dry_ towels, let
him be well rubbed with the warm hand of the mother or of the nurse. As
I previously recommended, while drying him and while rubbing him, let
him repose and kick and stretch either on the warm flannel apron, or
else on a small blanket placed on the lap. One bathing in the tub, and
that in the morning, is sufficient, and better than night and morning.
During the day, as I before observed, he may, after the action either of
his bowels or of his bladder, require several spongings of lukewarm
water, _for cleanliness is a grand incentive to health and comeliness_.

Remember it is absolutely necessary to every child from his earliest
babyhood to have a bath, to be immersed every morning of his life in the
water. This advice, unless in cases of severe illness, admits of no
exception. Water to the body—to the whole body—is a necessity of life,
of health, and of happiness; it wards off disease, it braces the nerves,
it hardens the frame, it is the finest tonic in the world. Oh, if every
mother would follow to the very letter this advice, how much misery, how
much ill health, might then be averted!




                        MANAGEMENT OF THE NAVEL.


13. _Should the navel-string be wrapped in_ SINGED _rag_?

There is nothing better than a piece of fine old linen rag, _unsinged_;
when singed, it frequently irritates the infant’s skin.

14. _How ought the navel-string to be wrapped in the rag?_

Take a piece of soft linen rag, about three inches wide and four inches
long, and wrap it neatly round the navel-string, in the same manner you
would around a cut finger, and then, to keep on the rag, tie it with a
few rounds of whity-brown thread. The navel-string thus covered should,
pointing upward, be placed on the belly of the child, and must be
secured in its place by means of a flannel belly-band.

15. _If, after the navel-string has been secured, bleeding should (in
the absence of the medical man) occur, how must it be restrained?_

The nurse or the attendant ought immediately to take off the rag, and
tightly, with a ligature composed of four or five whity-brown threads,
retie the navel-string; and to make assurance doubly sure, after once
tying it, she should pass the threads a second time around the
navel-string and tie it again; and after carefully ascertaining that it
no longer bleeds, fasten it up in the rag as before. Bleeding of the
navel-string rarely occurs, yet if it should do so—the medical man not
being at hand—the child’s after-health, or even his life, may, if the
above directions be not adopted, be endangered.

16. _When does the navel-string separate from the child?_

From five days to a week after birth; in some cases not until ten days
or a fortnight, or even, in rare cases, not until three weeks.

17. _If the navel-string does not at the end of a week come away, ought
any means to be used to cause the separation?_

Certainly not; it ought always to be allowed to drop off, which, when in
a fit state, it will readily do. Meddling with the navel-string has
frequently cost the babe a great deal of suffering, and in some cases
even his life.

18. _The navel is sometimes a little sore after the navel-string comes
away; what ought then to be done?_

A little simple cerate should be spread on lint, and be applied every
morning to the part affected; and a white-bread poultice, every night,
until it be quite healed.

19. _What are the causes of a rupture of the navel? What ought to be
done? Can it be cured?_

(1.) A rupture of the navel is sometimes occasioned by a meddlesome
nurse. She is very anxious to cause the navel-string to separate from
the infant’s body, more especially when it is longer in coming away than
usual. She, therefore, before it is in a fit state to drop off, forces
it away. (2.) The rupture, at another time, is occasioned by the child
incessantly crying. A mother, then, should always bear in mind that a
rupture of the navel is often caused by much crying, and that it
occasions much crying; indeed, it is a frequent cause of incessant
crying. A child, therefore, who, without any assignable cause, is
constantly crying, should have his navel carefully examined.

A rupture of the navel ought always to be treated early—the earlier the
better. Ruptures of the navel can only be _cured_ in infancy and in
childhood. If it be allowed to run on until adult age, a _cure_ is
impossible. Palliative means can then only be adopted.

The best treatment is a Burgundy pitch plaster, spread on a soft piece
of wash-leather about the size of the top of a tumbler, with a properly
adjusted pad (made from the plaster) fastened on the center of the
plaster, which will effectually keep up the rupture, and in a few weeks
will cure it. It will be necessary, from time to time, to renew the
plaster until the cure be effected. These plasters will be found both
more efficacious and pleasant than either a truss or an elastic bandage;
which latter appliances sometimes gall, and do more harm than they do
good.

20. _If a child has a groin rupture (an inguinal rupture), can that also
be cured?_

Certainly, if, soon after birth, it be properly attended to. Consult a
medical man, and he will supply you with a well-fitting truss, _which
will eventually cure him_. If the truss be properly made (under the
directions of an experienced surgeon) by a skillful surgical-instrument
maker, a beautiful, nicely fitting truss will be supplied, which will
take the proper and exact curve of the lower part of the infant’s belly,
and will thus keep on without using any under-strap whatever—a great
desideratum, as these under-straps are so constantly wetted and soiled
as to endanger the patient constantly catching cold. But if this
under-strap is to be superseded, the truss must be made exactly to fit
the child—to fit him like a ribbon; which is a difficult thing to
accomplish, unless it be fashioned by a skillful workman. It is only
lately that these trusses have been made without under-straps. Formerly
the under-straps were indispensable necessaries.

These groin ruptures require great attention and supervision, as the
rupture (the bowel) must, before putting on the truss, be cautiously and
thoroughly returned into the belly; and much care should be used to
prevent the chafing and galling of the tender skin of the babe, which an
ill-fitting truss would be sure to occasion. But if care and skill be
bestowed on the case, a perfect cure might in due time be insured. The
truss must not be discontinued until a _perfect_ cure be effected.

Let me strongly urge you to see that my advice is carried out to the
very letter, as a groin rupture can only be _cured_ in infancy and in
childhood. If it be allowed to run on, unattended to, until adult age,
he will be obliged to wear a truss _all his life_, which would be a
great annoyance and a perpetual irritation to him.




                               CLOTHING.


21. _Is it necessary to have a flannel cap in readiness to put on as
soon as a babe is born?_

Sir Charles Locock considers that a flannel cap is _not_ necessary, and
asserts that all his best nurses have long discarded flannel caps. Sir
Charles states that since the discontinuance of flannel caps infants
have not been more liable to inflammation of the eyes.

Such authority is, in my opinion, conclusive. My advice, therefore, to
you is, by all means discontinue the use of flannel caps.

22. _What kind of a belly-band do you recommend—a flannel or a calico
one?_

I prefer flannel, for two reasons—first, on account of its keeping the
child’s bowels comfortably warm; and, secondly, because of its not
chilling him (and thus endangering cold, etc.) when he wets himself. The
belly-band ought to be moderately but not tightly applied, as, if
tightly applied, it would interfere with the necessary movements of the
bowels.

23. _When should the belly-band be discontinued?_

When the child is two or three months old. The best way of leaving it
off is to tear a strip off daily for a few mornings, and then to leave
it off altogether. “Nurses who take charge of an infant when the monthly
nurse leaves are frequently in the habit of at once leaving off the
belly-band, which often leads to ruptures when the child cries or
strains. It is far wiser to retain it too long than too short a time;
and when a child catches hooping-cough while still very young, it is
safer to resume the belly-band.” [Communicated by Sir Charles Locock to
the Author.]

24. _Have you any remarks to make on the clothing of an infant?_

A baby’s clothing ought to be light, warm, loose, and free from pins.
(1.) _It should be light_, without being too airy. Many infants’ clothes
are both too long and too cumbersome. It is really painful to see how
some poor little babies are weighed down with a weight of clothes. They
may be said to “bear the burden,” and that a heavy one, from the very
commencement of their lives! How absurd, too, the practice of making
them wear _long_ clothes. Clothes to cover a child’s feet, and even a
little beyond, may be desirable; but for clothes, when the infant is
carried about, to reach to the ground, is foolish and cruel in the
extreme. I have seen a delicate baby almost ready to faint under the
infliction. (2.) _It should be warm_, without being too warm. The parts
that ought to be kept warm are the chest, the bowels, and the feet. If
the infant be delicate, especially if he be subject to inflammation of
the lungs, he ought to wear a fine flannel, instead of his usual shirts,
which should be changed as frequently. (3.) _The dress should be loose_,
so as to prevent any pressure upon the blood-vessels, which would
otherwise impede the circulation, and thus hinder a proper development
of the parts. It ought to be loose about the chest and waist, so that
the lungs and the heart may have free play. It should be loose about the
stomach, so that digestion may not be impeded; it ought to be loose
about the bowels, in order that the spiral motion of the intestines may
not be interfered with; hence the importance of putting on a belly-band
moderately slack; it should be loose about the sleeves, so that the
blood may course, without let or hindrance, through the arteries and
veins; it ought to be loose, then, everywhere, for nature delights in
freedom from restraint, and will resent, sooner or later, any
interference. Oh that a mother would take common sense, and not custom,
as her guide! (4.) _As few pins_ should be used in the dressing of a
baby as possible. Inattention to this advice has caused many a little
sufferer to be thrown into convulsions.

The generality of mothers use no pins in the dressing of their children;
they tack with a needle and thread every part that requires fastening.
They do not even use pins to fasten the baby’s napkins. They make the
diapers with loops and tapes, and thus altogether supersede the use of
pins in the dressing of an infant. The plan is a good one, takes very
little extra time, and deserves to be universally adopted. If pins be
used for the napkins, they ought to be the Patent Safety Pins.

25. _Is there any necessity for a nurse being particular in airing an
infant’s clothes before they are put on? If she were less particular,
would it not make him more hardy?_

A nurse cannot be too particular on this head. A baby’s clothes ought to
be well aired the day before they are put on, as they should _not_ be
put on warm from the fire. It is well, where it can be done, to let him
have clean clothes daily. Where this cannot be afforded, the clothes, as
soon as they are taken off at night, ought to be well aired, so as to
free them from the perspiration, and that they may be ready to put on
the following morning. It is truly nonsensical to endeavor to harden a
child, or any one else, by putting on damp clothes!

26. _What is your opinion of caps for an infant?_

The head ought to be kept cool; caps, therefore, are unnecessary. If
caps be used at all, they should only be worn for the first month in
summer, or for the first two or three months in winter. If a babe take
to caps, it requires care in leaving them off, or he will catch cold.
When you are about discontinuing them, put a thinner and a thinner one
on, every time they are changed, until you leave them off altogether.

But remember, my opinion is, that a child is better _without_ caps; they
only heat his head, cause undue perspiration, and thus make him more
liable to catch cold.

If a babe does not wear a cap in the day, it is not at all necessary
that he should wear one at night. He will sleep more comfortably without
one, and it will be better for his health. Moreover, night-caps injure
both the thickness and the beauty of the hair.

27. _Have you any remarks to make on the clothing of an infant, when, in
the winter time, he is sent out for exercise?_

Be sure that he is well wrapped up. He ought to have under his cloak a
knitted worsted spencer, which should button behind; and if the weather
be very cold, a shawl over all; and, provided it be dry above, and the
wind be not in the east or in the northeast, he may then brave the
weather. He will then come from his walk refreshed and strengthened, for
cold air is an invigorating tonic. In a subsequent conversation I will
indicate the proper age at which a child should be first sent out to
take exercise in the open air.

28. _At what age ought an infant “to be shortened?”_

This, of course, will depend upon the season. In the summer, the right
time “for shortening a babe,” as it is called, is at the end of two
months; in the winter, at the end of three months. But if the right time
for “shortening” a child should happen to be in the spring, let it be
deferred until the end of May. The English springs are very trying and
treacherous; and sometimes, in April, the weather is almost as cold, and
the wind as biting, as in winter. It is treacherous, for the sun is hot,
and the wind, which is at this time of the year frequently easterly, is
keen and cutting. I should far prefer “to shorten” a child in the winter
than in the early spring.




                                 DIET.


29. _Are you an advocate for putting a baby to the breast soon after
birth, or for waiting, as many do, until the third day?_

The infant ought to be put to the breast soon after birth; the interest,
both of the mother and of the child, demands it. It will be advisable to
wait three or four hours, that the mother may recover from her fatigue;
and then the babe must be put to the breast. If this be done, he will
generally take the nipple with avidity.

It might be said that at so early a period there is no milk in the
breast; but such is not usually the case. There generally is a _little_
from the very beginning; which acts on the baby’s bowels like a dose of
purgative medicine, and appears to be intended by nature to cleanse the
system. But, provided there be no milk at first, the very act of sucking
not only gives the child a notion, but, at the same time, causes a
draught (as it is usually called) in the breast, and enables the milk to
flow easily.

Of course, if there be _no_ milk in the breast—the babe having been
applied once or twice to determine the fact—then you must wait for a few
hours before applying him again to the nipple, that is to say, until the
milk be secreted.

An infant who, for two or three days, is kept from the breast, and who
is fed upon gruel, generally becomes feeble, and frequently, at the end
of that time, will not take the nipple at all. Besides, there is a thick
cream (similar to the biestings of a cow), which, if not drawn out by
the child, may cause inflammation and gathering of the bosom, and,
consequently, great suffering to the mother. Moreover, placing him
_early_ to the breast moderates the severity of the mother’s
after-pains, and lessens the risk of her flooding. A new-born babe must
_not_ have gruel given to him, as it disorders the bowels, causes a
disinclination to suck, and thus makes him feeble.

30. _If an infant show any disinclination to suck, or if he appear
unable to apply his tongue to the nipple, what ought to be done?_

Immediately call the attention of the medical man to the fact, in order
that he may ascertain whether he be tongue-tied. If he be, the simple
operation of dividing the bridle of the tongue will remedy the defect,
and will cause him to take the nipple with ease and comfort.

31. _Provided there be no milk_ AT FIRST, _what ought then to be done_?

Wait with patience: the child (if the mother has no milk) will not, for
at least twelve hours, require artificial food. In the generality of
instances, then, artificial food is not at all necessary; but if it
should be needed, one-third of new milk and two-thirds of warm water,
slightly sweetened with loaf sugar (or with brown sugar, if the babe’s
bowels have not been opened), should be given, in small quantities at a
time, every four hours, until the milk be secreted, and then it must be
discontinued. The infant ought to be put to the nipple every four hours,
but not oftener, until he be able to find nourishment.

If, after the application of the child for a few times, he is unable to
find nourishment, then it will be necessary to wait until the milk be
secreted. As soon as it is secreted, he must be applied, with great
regularity, _alternately_ to each breast.

I say _alternately_ to each breast. _This is most important advice._
Sometimes a child, for some inexplicable reason, prefers one breast to
the other, and the mother, to save a little contention, concedes the
point, and allows him to have his own way. And what is frequently the
consequence?—a gathered breast!

We frequently hear of a babe having no notion of sucking. This “no
notion” may generally be traced to bad management, to stuffing him with
food, and thus giving him a disinclination to take the nipple at all.

32. _How often should a mother suckle her infant?_

A mother generally suckles her baby too often, having him almost
constantly at the breast. This practice is injurious both to parent and
to child. The stomach requires repose as much as any other part of the
body; and how can it have it if it be constantly loaded with
breast-milk? For the first month, he ought to be suckled about every
hour and a half; for the second month, every two hours,—gradually
increasing, as he becomes older, the distance of time between, until at
length he has it about every four hours.

If a baby were suckled at stated periods, he would only look for the
bosom at those times, and be satisfied. A mother is frequently in the
habit of giving the child the breast every time he cries, regardless of
the cause. The cause too frequently is, that he has been too often
suckled—his stomach has been overloaded; the little fellow is constantly
in pain, and he gives utterance to it by cries. How absurd is such a
practice! We may as well endeavor to put out a fire by feeding it with
fuel. An infant ought to be accustomed to regularity in every thing—in
times for suckling, for sleeping, etc. No children thrive so well as
those who are thus early taught.

33. _Where the mother is_ MODERATELY _strong, do you advise that the
infant should have any other food than the breast_?

Artificial food must not, for the first three or four months, be given,
if the parent be _moderately_ strong; of course, if she be feeble, a
_little_ food will be necessary. Many delicate women enjoy better health
while suckling than at any other period of their lives.

34. _What food is the best substitute for a mother’s milk?_

The food that suits one infant will not agree with another. (1.) The one
that I have found the most generally useful, is made as follows: Boil
the crumb of bread for two hours in water, taking particular care that
it does not burn; then add only a _little_ lump sugar (or _brown_ sugar,
if the bowels be costive), to make it palatable. When he is five or six
months old, mix a little new milk—the milk of ONE cow—with it,
gradually, as he becomes older, increasing the quantity until it be
nearly all milk, there being only enough water to boil the bread; the
milk should be poured boiling hot on the bread. Sometimes the two
milks—the mother’s and the cow’s milk—do not agree; when such is the
case, let the milk be left out, both in this and in the foods following,
and let the food be made with water instead of with milk and water. In
other respects, until the child is weaned, let it be made as above
directed; when he is weaned, good fresh cow’s milk MUST, as previously
recommended, be used. (2.) Or, cut thin slices of bread into a basin,
cover the bread with _cold_ water, place it in an oven for two hours to
bake; take it out, beat the bread up with a fork, and then slightly
sweeten it. This is an excellent food. (3.) If the above should not
agree with the infant (although, if properly made, they almost
invariably do), “tous-les-mois” may be given. (4.) Or, Robb’s Biscuit,
as it is “among the best bread compounds made out of wheat-flour, and is
almost always readily digested.”—_Routh._ “Tous-les-mois” is the starch
obtained from the tuberous roots of various species of _canna_; and is
imported from the West Indies. It is very similar to arrow-root. I
suppose it is called “tous-les-mois,” as it is good to be eaten all the
year round.

(5.) Another good food is the following: Take about a pound of flour,
put it in a cloth, tie it up tightly, place it in a saucepanful of
water, and let it boil for four or five hours; then take it out, peel
off the outer rind, and the inside will be found quite dry, which grate.
(6.) Another way of preparing an infant’s food, is to bake flour—biscuit
flour—in a slow oven, until it be of a light fawn color. (7.) An
excellent food for a baby, is baked crumbs of bread. The manner of
preparing it is as follows: Crumb some bread on a plate; put it a little
distance from the fire to dry. When dry, rub the crumbs in a mortar, and
reduce them to a fine powder; then pass them through a sieve. Having
done which, put the crumbs of bread into a slow oven, and let them bake
until they be of a light fawn color. A small quantity either of the
boiled, or of the baked flour, or of the baked crumb of bread, ought to
be made into food in the same way as gruel is made, and should then be
slightly sweetened, according to the state of the bowels, either with
lump or with brown sugar.

(8.) Baked flour sometimes produces constipation; when such is the case,
Mr. Appleton of Budleigh Salterton, Devon, wisely recommends a mixture
of baked flour and prepared oatmeal, in the proportion of two of the
former and one of the latter. He says: “To avoid the constipating
effects, I have always had mixed, before baking, one part of prepared
oatmeal with two parts of flour; this compound I have found both
nourishing, and regulating to the bowels. One tablespoonful of it, mixed
with a quarter of a pint of milk, or milk and water, when well boiled,
flavored, and sweetened with white sugar, produces a thick, nourishing,
and delicious food for infants or invalids.” He goes on to remark: “I
know of no food, after repeated trials, that can be so strongly
recommended by the profession to all mothers in the rearing of their
infants, without or with the aid of the breast, at the same time
relieving them of much draining and dragging while nursing with an
insufficiency of milk, as baked flour and oatmeal.” If there is any
difficulty in obtaining _prepared_ oatmeal, Robertson’s Patent Groats
will answer equally as well.

(9.) A ninth food may be made with “Farinaceous Food for Infants,
prepared by Hards of Dartford.” If Hards’ Farinaceous Food produces
costiveness—as it sometimes does—let it be mixed either with equal parts
or with one-third of Robertson’s Patent Groats. The mixture of the two
together makes a splendid food for a baby. (10.) A tenth, and an
excellent one, may be made with rusks, boiled for an hour in water,
which ought then to be well beaten up by means of a fork, and slightly
sweetened with lump sugar. Great care should be taken to select good
rusks, as few articles vary so much in quality. (11.) An eleventh is—the
top crust of a baker’s loaf, boiled for an hour in water, and then
moderately sweetened with lump sugar. If, at any time, the child’s
bowels should be costive, _raw_ must be substituted for _lump_ sugar.
(12.) Another capital food for an infant, is that made by Lemann’s
Biscuit Powder. (13.) Or, Brown and Polson’s Patent Corn Flour will be
found suitable. The Queen’s cook, in his recent valuable work, gives the
following formula for making it: “To one dessertspoonful of Brown &
Polson, mixed with a wineglassful of cold water, add half a pint of
boiling water; stir over the fire for five minutes; sweeten lightly, and
feed the baby; but if the infant is being brought up by the hand, this
food should then be mixed with milk—not otherwise.”

(14.) The following is a good and nourishing food for a baby: Soak, for
an hour, some _best_ rice in cold water; strain, and add fresh water to
the rice; then let it simmer till it will pulp through a sieve; put the
pulp and the water in a saucepan, with a lump or two of sugar, and again
let it simmer for a quarter of an hour; a portion of this should be
mixed with one-third of fresh milk, so as to make it of the consistence
of good cream.

When the baby is five or six months old, new milk should be added to any
of the above articles of food, in a similar way to that recommended for
boiled bread.

(15.) For a delicate infant, lentil powder, better known as Du Barry’s
“Revalenta Arabica,” is invaluable. It ought to be made into food, with
new milk, in the same way that arrow-root is made, and should be
moderately sweetened with loaf sugar. Whatever food is selected ought to
be given by means of a nursing-bottle.

If a child’s bowels be relaxed and weak, or if the motions be offensive,
the milk _must_ be boiled. The following (16.) is a good food when an
infant’s bowels are weak and relaxed: “Into five large spoonfuls of the
purest water rub smooth one dessertspoonful of fine flour. Set over the
fire five spoonfuls of new milk, and put two bits of sugar into it; the
moment it boils, pour it into the flour and water, and stir it over a
slow fire twenty minutes.”

Where there is much emaciation, I have found (17.) genuine arrow-root a
very valuable article of food for an infant, as it contains a great deal
of starch, which starch helps to form fat and to evolve caloric
(heat)—both of which a poor, emaciated, chilly child stands so much in
need of. It must be made with good fresh milk, and ought to be slightly
sweetened with loaf sugar; a small pinch of table salt should be added
to it.

I have given you a large and well-tried infant’s dietary to choose from,
as it is sometimes difficult to fix on one that will suit; but remember,
if you find one of the above to agree, keep to it, as a baby requires a
simplicity in food—a child a greater variety.

Let me, in this place, insist upon the necessity of great care and
attention being observed in the preparation of any of the above articles
of diet. A babe’s stomach is very delicate, and will revolt at either
ill-made, or lumpy, or burnt food. Great care ought to be observed as to
the cleanliness of the cooking utensils. The above directions require
the strict supervision of the mother.

Broths have been recommended, but, for my own part, I think that, for a
_young_ infant, they are objectionable; they are apt to turn acid on the
stomach, and to cause flatulence and sickness; they sometimes disorder
the bowels and induce griping and purging.

Whatever artificial food is used ought to be given by means of a bottle,
not only as it is a more natural way than any other of feeding a baby,
as it causes him to suck as though he were drawing it from the mother’s
breast, but as the act of sucking causes the salivary glands to press
out their contents, which materially assists digestion. Moreover, it
seems to satisfy and comfort him more than it otherwise would do.

The food ought to be of the consistence of good cream, and should be
made fresh and fresh. It ought to be given milk-warm. Attention must be
paid to the cleanliness of the vessel, and care should be taken that the
milk be that of ONE cow, and that it be new and of good quality; for if
not, it will turn acid and sour, and disorder the stomach, and will thus
cause either flatulence or looseness of the bowels, or perhaps
convulsions. I consider it to be of immense importance to the infant,
that the milk be had from ONE cow. A writer in the _Medical Times and
Gazette_, speaking on this subject, makes the following sensible
remarks: “I do not know if a practice common among French ladies, when
they do not nurse, has obtained the attention among ourselves which it
seems to me to deserve. When the infant is to be fed with cow milk, that
from various cows is submitted to examination by the medical man, and,
if possible, tried on some child, and when the milk of any cow has been
chosen, no other milk is ever suffered to enter the child’s lips, for a
French lady would as soon offer to her infant’s mouth the breasts of
half-a-dozen wet-nurses in the day, as mix together the milk of various
cows, which must differ even as the animals themselves, in its
constituent qualities. Great attention is also paid to the pasture, or
other food of the cow thus appropriated.”

The only way to be sure of having it from _one_ cow, is (if you have not
a cow of your own) to have the milk from a _respectable_ cow-keeper, and
to have it brought to your house in a can of your own (the London
milk-cans being the best for the purpose). The better plan is to have
two cans and to have the milk fresh, and fresh every night and morning.
The cans, after each time of using, ought to be scalded out; and, once a
week, the can should be filled with _cold_ water, and the water should
be allowed to remain in it until the can be again required.

Very little sugar should be used in the food, as much sugar weakens the
digestion. A small pinch of table salt ought to be added to whatever
food is given, as “the best savor is salt.” Salt is most wholesome—it
strengthens and assists digestion, prevents the formation of worms, and,
in small quantities, may with advantage be given (if artificial food be
used) to the youngest baby.

35. _Where it is found to be absolutely necessary to give an infant
artificial food_ WHILE SUCKLING, _how often ought he to be fed_?

Not oftener than twice during the twenty-four hours, and then only in
_small_ quantities at a time, as the stomach requires rest, and at the
same time can manage to digest a little food better than it can a great
deal.

Let me again urge upon you the importance, if it be at all practicable,
of keeping the child _entirely_ to the breast for the first three or
four months of his existence. Remember there is no _real_ substitute for
a mother’s milk; there is no food so well adapted to his stomach; there
is no diet equal to it in developing muscle, in making bone, or in
producing that beautiful plump rounded contour of the limbs; there is
nothing like a mother’s milk _alone_ in making a child contented and
happy, in laying the foundation of a healthy constitution, in preparing
the body for a long life, in giving him tone to resist disease, or in
causing him to cut his teeth easily and well; in short, _the mother’s
milk is the greatest temporal blessing an infant can possess_.

As a general rule, therefore, when the child and the mother are
tolerably strong, he is better _without artificial_ food until he has
attained the age of three or four months; then it will usually be
necessary to feed him twice a day, so as gradually to prepare him to be
weaned (if possible) at the end of nine months. The food mentioned in
the foregoing conversation will be the best for him, commencing
_without_ the cow’s milk, but gradually adding it, as less mother’s milk
and more artificial food be given.

36. _When the mother is not able to suckle her infant herself, what
ought to be done?_

It must first be ascertained, _beyond all doubt_, that a mother is not
able to suckle her own child. Many delicate ladies do suckle their
infants with advantage, not only to their offspring, but to themselves.
“I will maintain,” says Steele, “that the mother grows stronger by it,
and will have her health better than she would have otherwise. She will
find it the greatest cure and preservative for the vapors [nervousness]
and future miscarriages, much beyond any other remedy whatsoever. Her
children will be like giants, whereas otherwise they are but living
shadows, and like unripe fruit; and certainly if a woman is strong
enough to bring forth a child, she is beyond all doubt strong enough to
nurse it afterward.”

Many mothers are never so well as when they are nursing; besides,
suckling prevents a lady from becoming pregnant so frequently as she
otherwise would. This, if she be delicate, is an important
consideration, and more especially if she be subject to miscarry. The
effects of a miscarriage are far more weakening than those of suckling.

A hireling, let her be ever so well inclined, can never have the
affection and unceasing assiduity of a mother, and, therefore, cannot
perform the duties of suckling with equal advantage to the baby.

The number of children who die under five years of age is enormous—many
of them from the want of the mother’s milk. There is a regular “parental
baby slaughter”—“a massacre of the innocents”—constantly going on in
England, in consequence of infants being thus deprived of their proper
nutriment and just dues! The mortality from this cause is frightful,
chiefly, occurring among rich people who are either too grand, or, from
luxury, too delicate, to perform such duties: poor married women, as a
rule, nurse their own children, and, in consequence, reap their reward.

If it be ascertained, _past all doubt_, that a mother cannot suckle her
child, then, if the circumstances of the parents will allow—and they
ought to strain a point to accomplish it—a healthy wet-nurse should be
procured, as, of course, the food which nature has supplied is far, very
far superior to any invented by art.

Never bring up a baby, then, if you can possibly avoid it, on
_artificial_ food. Remember, as I proved in a former conversation, there
is in early infancy no _real_ substitute for either a mother’s or a
wet-nurse’s milk. It is impossible to imitate the admirable and subtle
chemistry of nature. The law of nature is, that a baby, for the first
few months of his existence, shall be brought up by the breast; and
nature’s law cannot be broken with impunity. For further reasons why
artificial food is not desirable at an early period of infancy, see
answer to 35th question. It will be imperatively necessary, then—

               “To give to nature what is nature’s due.”

Again, in case of a severe illness occurring during the first nine
months of a child’s life, what a comfort either the mother’s or the
wet-nurse’s milk is to him! it often determines whether he shall live or
die.

But if a wet-nurse cannot fill the place of a mother, then, asses’ milk
will be found the best substitute, as it approaches nearer, in
composition, than any other animal’s, to human milk; but it is both
difficult and expensive to obtain. The next best substitute is goats’
milk. Either the one or the other ought to be milked fresh and fresh, as
it is wanted, and should be given by means of a feeding-bottle.

Asses’ milk is more suitable for _delicate_ infants, and goats’ milk for
those who are _strong_.

If neither asses’ milk nor goats’ milk can be procured, then the
following from the very commencement should be given:

       New milk, the produce of ONE _healthy_ cow,
       Warm water, of each, equal parts;
       Table salt, a few grains;
       Lump sugar, a sufficient quantity to slightly sweeten it.

Liebig, the great chemist, asserts that a small quantity of table salt
to the food is essential to the health of children. The milk itself
ought not to be heated over the fire, but should, as above directed, be
warmed by the water; it must, morning and evening, be had fresh and
fresh. It now and then happens that if the milk be not boiled, the
motions of an infant are offensive; _when such is the case_ let the milk
be boiled, but not otherwise. The milk and water should be of the same
temperature as the mother’s milk, that is to say, at about ninety to
ninety-five degrees Fahrenheit. It ought to be given by means of a
feeding-bottle, and care must be taken to _scald_ the bottle out twice a
day, for if attention be not paid to this point the delicate stomach of
an infant is soon disordered. As he grows older the milk should be
gradually increased, and the water decreased, until nearly all milk be
given.

There will, in many cases, be quite sufficient nourishment in the above;
I have known some robust infants brought up on it alone. But if it
should not agree with the child, or if there should not be sufficient
nourishment in it, then the food recommended in answer to No. 34
question ought to be given, with this only difference—a little new milk
_must_ from the beginning be added, and should be gradually increased,
until nearly all milk be used.

The milk, as a general rule, ought to be _unboiled_; but if it purge
violently, or if it cause offensive motions—which it sometimes does—then
it must be boiled. The moment the milk boils up it should be taken off
the fire.

Food ought, for the first month, to be given about every two hours; for
the second month, about every three hours; lengthening the space of time
as the baby advances in age. A mother must be careful not to over-feed a
child, as over-feeding is a prolific source of disease.

Let it be thoroughly understood, and let there be no mistake about it,
that a babe, during the first nine months of his life, MUST have—it is
absolutely necessary for his very existence—milk of some kind, as the
staple and principal article of his diet, either mother’s, or
wet-nurse’s, or asses’, or goat’s, or cow’s own milk.

37. _How would you choose a wet-nurse?_

I would inquire particularly into the state of her health; whether she
be of a healthy family, or a consumptive habit, or if she or any of her
family have labored under “king’s evil;” ascertaining if there be any
seams or swellings about her neck; any eruptions or blotches upon her
skin; if she has a plentiful breast of milk, and if it be of good
quality (which may readily be ascertained by milking a little into a
glass. “It should be thin, and of a bluish-white color, sweet to the
taste, and when allowed to stand should throw up a considerable quantity
of cream.”—_Maunsell and Evertson on the Diseases of Children._) If she
has good nipples, sufficiently long for the baby to hold; that they be
not sore; and if her own child be of the same or nearly of the same age
as the one you wish her to nurse. Ascertain whether she menstruates
during suckling; if she does, the milk is not so good and nourishing,
and you had better decline taking her. Sir Charles Locock considers that
a woman who menstruates during lactation is objectionable as a
wet-nurse, and “that as a mother with her first child is more liable to
that objection, that a second or a third child’s mother is more eligible
than a first.”—_Letter to the Author._ Assure yourself that her own babe
is strong and healthy, and that he is free from a sore mouth and from a
“breaking-out” of the skin. Indeed, if it be possible to procure such a
wet-nurse, she ought to be from the country, of ruddy complexion, of
clear skin, and of between twenty and five-and-twenty years of age, as
the milk will then be fresh, pure, and nourishing.

I consider it to be of great importance that the infant of the wet-nurse
should be, as nearly as possible, of the same age as your own, as the
milk varies in quality according to the age of the child. For instance,
during the commencement of suckling, the milk is thick and creamy,
similar to the biestings of a cow, which, if given to a babe of a few
months old, would cause derangement of the stomach and bowels. After the
first few days, the appearance of the milk changes; it becomes of a
bluish-white color, and contains less nourishment. The milk gradually
becomes more and more nourishing as the infant becomes older and
requires more support.

In selecting a wet-nurse for a very small and feeble babe, you must
carefully ascertain that the nipples of the wet-nurse are good and soft,
and yet not very large: if they be very large, the child’s mouth being
very small, he may not be able to hold them. You must note, too, whether
the milk flows readily from the nipple into the child’s mouth; if it
does not, he may not have strength to draw it, and he would soon die of
starvation. The only way of ascertaining whether the infant actually
draws the milk from the nipple, can be done by examining the mouth of
the child _immediately_ after his taking the breast, and seeing for
yourself whether there be actually milk in his mouth.

Very feeble new-born babes sometimes cannot take the bosom, be the
nipples and the breasts ever so good. In such a case, cow’s milk and
water, sugar and salt, as recommended at page 45, must be given in small
quantities at a time—from two to four teaspoonfuls—but frequently; if
the child be awake, every hour or every half hour, both night and day,
until he be able to take the breast. If, then, a puny, feeble babe is
only able to take but little at a time, and that little by teaspoonfuls,
he must have little and often, in order that “many a little might make a
mickle.”

I have known many puny, delicate children who had not strength to hold
the nipple in their mouths, but who could take milk and water (as above
recommended) by teaspoonfuls only at a time, with steady perseverance,
and giving it every half hour or hour (according to the quantity
swallowed), at length be able to take the breast, and eventually become
strong and hearty children; but such cases require unwearied watching,
perseverance, and care. Bear in mind, then, that the smaller the
quantity of the milk and water given at a time, the oftener must it be
administered, as, of course, the babe must have a certain quantity of
food to sustain life.

38. _What ought to be the diet either of a wet-nurse, or of a mother who
is suckling?_

It is a common practice to cram a wet-nurse with food, and to give her
strong ale to drink, to make good nourishment and plentiful milk! This
practice is absurd; for it either, by making the nurse feverish, makes
the milk more sparing than usual, or it causes the milk to be gross and
unwholesome. On the other hand, we must not run into an opposite
extreme. The mother, or the wet-nurse, by using those means most
conducive to her own health, will best advance the interest of her
little charge.

A wet-nurse ought to live somewhat in the following way: Let her for
breakfast have black tea, with one or two slices of cold meat, if her
appetite demand it, but not otherwise. It is customary for a wet-nurse
to make a hearty luncheon; of this I do not approve. If she feel either
faint or low at eleven o’clock, let her have either a tumbler of porter,
or of mild fresh ale, with a piece of dry toast soaked in it. She ought
not to dine later than half-past one or two o’clock; she should eat, for
dinner, either mutton or beef, with either mealy potatoes, or asparagus,
or French beans, or secale, or turnips, or brocoli, or cauliflower, and
stale bread. Rich pastry, soups, gravies, high-seasoned dishes, salted
meats, greens, and cabbage must one and all be carefully avoided, as
they only tend to disorder the stomach, and thus to deteriorate the
milk.

It is a common remark, that “a mother who is suckling may eat anything.”
I do not agree with this opinion. Can impure or improper food make pure
and proper milk, or can impure or improper milk make good blood for an
infant, and thus good health?

The wet-nurse ought to take with her dinner a moderate quantity of
either sound porter, or of mild (but not old or strong) ale. Tea should
be taken at half-past five or six o’clock; supper at nine, which should
consist either of a slice or two of cold meat, or of cheese if she
prefer it, with half a pint of porter or of mild ale; occasionally, a
basin of gruel may with advantage be substituted. Hot and late suppers
are prejudicial to the mother or to the wet-nurse, and, consequently, to
the child. The wet-nurse ought to be in bed every night by ten o’clock.

It might be said that I have been too minute and particular in my rules
for a wet-nurse; but when it is considered of what importance good milk
is to the well-doing of an infant, in making him strong and robust, not
only now, but as he grows up to manhood, I shall, I trust, be excused
for my prolixity.

39. _Have you any more hints to offer with regard to the management of a
wet-nurse?_

A wet-nurse is frequently allowed to remain in bed until a late hour in
the morning, and during the day to continue in the house, as if she were
a fixture! How is it possible that any one, under such treatment, can
continue healthy?

A wet-nurse ought to rise early, and, if the weather and season will
permit, take a walk, which will give her an appetite for breakfast and
will make a good meal for her little charge. This, of course, cannot,
during the winter months, be done; but even then, she ought, some part
of the day, to take every opportunity of walking out; indeed, in the
summer time she should live half the day in the open air.

She ought strictly to avoid crowded rooms; her mind should be kept calm
and unruffled, as nothing disorders the milk so much as passion and
other violent emotions of the mind; a fretful temper is very injurious,
on which account you should, in choosing your wet-nurse, endeavor to
procure one of a mild, calm, and placid disposition.

  “The child is poisoned.”

  “Poisoned! by whom?”

  “By you. You have been fretting.”

  “Nay, indeed, mother. How can I help fretting?”

  “Don’t tell me, Margaret. A nursing mother has no business to fret.
  She must turn her mind away from her grief to the comfort that lies in
  her lap. Know you not that the child pines if the mother vexes
  herself?”—_The Cloister and the Hearth._ By Charles Reade.

A wet-nurse ought never to be allowed to dose her little charge either
with Godfrey’s Cordial, or with Dalby’s Carminative, or with Syrup of
White Poppies, or with medicine of any kind whatever. Let her thoroughly
understand this, and let there be no mistake in the matter. Do not, for
one moment, allow your children’s health to be tampered and trifled
with. A baby’s health is too precious to be doctored, to be experimented
upon, and to be ruined by an ignorant person.

40. _Have the goodness to state at what age a child ought to be weaned?_

This, of course, must depend both upon the strength of the child and
upon the health of the parent; on an average, nine months is the proper
time. If the mother be delicate it may be found necessary to wean the
infant at six months; or if he be weak, or laboring under any disease,
it may be well to continue suckling him for twelve months; but after
that time the breast will do him more harm than good, and will,
moreover, injure the mother’s health, and may, if she be so predisposed,
excite consumption.

41. _How would you recommend a mother to act when she weans her child?_

She ought, as the word signifies, do it gradually—that is to say, she
should, by degrees, give him less and less of the breast, and more and
more of artificial food; at length she must only suckle him at night;
and lastly, it would be well for the mother either to send him away, or
to leave him at home, and, for a few days, to go away herself.

A good plan is, for the nurse-maid to have a half-pint bottle of new
milk—which has been previously boiled—in the bed, so as to give a little
to him in lieu of the breast. The previous boiling of the milk will
prevent the warmth of the bed turning the milk sour, which it would
otherwise do. The warmth of the body will keep the milk of a proper
temperature, and will supersede the use of lamps, of candle-frames, and
other troublesome contrivances.

42. _While a mother is weaning her infant, and after she has weaned him,
what ought to be his diet?_

Any one of the foods recommended in answer to question 34, page 36.

43. _If a child be suffering severely from “wind,” is there any
objection to the addition of a small quantity either of gin or of
peppermint to his food to disperse it?_

It is a murderous practice to add either gin or peppermint of the shops
(which is oil of peppermint dissolved in spirits) to his food. Many
children have, by such a practice, been made puny and delicate, and have
gradually dropped into an untimely grave. An infant who is kept, for the
first three or four months, _entirely_ to the breast—more especially if
the mother be careful in her own diet—seldom suffers from “wind;” those,
on the contrary, who have much or improper food, suffer severely. For
the first three or four months never, if you can possibly avoid it, give
artificial food to an infant who is sucking. There is nothing, in the
generality of cases, that agrees, for the first few months, like the
mother’s milk _alone_.

Care in feeding, then, is the grand preventive of “wind;” but if,
notwithstanding all your precautions, the child be troubled with
flatulence, the remedies recommended under the head of Flatulence will
generally answer the purpose.

44. _Have you any remarks to make on sugar for sweetening a baby’s
food?_

A _small_ quantity of sugar in an infant’s food is requisite, sugar
being nourishing and fattening, and making cows’ milk to resemble
somewhat in its properties human milk; but, bear in mind, _it must be
used sparingly. Much_ sugar cloys the stomach, weakens the digestion,
produces acidity, sour belchings, and wind.

If a baby’s bowels be either regular or relaxed, _lump_ sugar is the
best for the purpose of sweetening his food; if his bowels are inclined
to be costive, _brown_ sugar ought to be substituted for lump sugar, as
_brown_ sugar acts on a young babe as an aperient, and, in the
generality of cases, is far preferable to physicking him with opening
medicine. An infant’s bowels, whenever it be practicable (and it
generally is), ought to be regulated by a judicious dietary rather than
by physic.




                              VACCINATION.


45. _Are you an advocate for vaccination?_

Certainly. I consider it to be one of the greatest blessings ever
conferred upon mankind. Small-pox, before vaccination was adopted,
ravaged the country like a plague, and carried off thousands annually;
and those who did escape with their lives were frequently made loathsome
and disgusting objects by it. Even inoculation (which is cutting for the
small-pox) was attended with danger—more especially to the
unprotected—as it caused the disease to spread like wildfire, and thus
it carried off immense numbers.

Vaccination is one and an important cause of our increasing population;
small-pox, in olden times, decimated the country.

46. _But vaccination does not always protect a child from small-pox?_

I grant you that it does not _always_ protect him, _neither does
inoculation_; but when he is vaccinated, if he take the infection, he is
seldom pitted, and very rarely dies, and the disease assumes a
comparatively mild form. There are a few, very few fatal cases recorded
after vaccination, and these may be considered as only exceptions to the
general rule; and, possibly some of these may be traced to the arm, when
the child was vaccinated, not having taken proper effect.

If children and adults were _revaccinated_,—say every seven years after
the first vaccination,—depend upon it, even these rare cases would not
occur, and in a short time small-pox would only be known by name.

47. _Do you consider it, then, the imperative duty of a mother in every
case to have, after the lapse of every seven years, her children
revaccinated?_

I decidedly do; it would be an excellent plan for _every_ person, once
every seven years, to be revaccinated, and even oftener, if small-pox be
rife in the neighborhood. Vaccination, however frequently performed, can
never do the slightest harm, and might do inestimable good. Small-pox is
both a pest and a disgrace, and ought to be constantly fought and
battled with until it is banished (which it may readily be) the kingdom.

I say that small-pox is a pest; it is worse than the plague, for if not
kept in subjection it is more general—sparing neither young nor old,
rich nor poor, and commits greater ravages than the plague ever did.
Small-pox is a disgrace; it is a disgrace to any civilized land, as
there is no necessity for its presence: if cow-pox were properly and
frequently performed, small-pox would be unknown. Cow-pox is a weapon to
conquer small-pox, and to drive it ignominiously from the field.

My firm belief then is, that if _every_ person were, _every seven
years_, duly and properly vaccinated, small-pox might be utterly
exterminated; but as long as there are such lax notions on the subject,
and such gross negligence, the disease will always be rampant, for the
poison of small-pox never slumbers nor sleeps, but requires the utmost
diligence to eradicate it. The great Dr. Jenner, the discoverer of
cow-pox as a preventative of small-pox, strongly advocated the absolute
necessity of _every_ person being revaccinated once every seven years,
or even oftener, if there was an epidemic of small-pox in the
neighborhood.

48. _Are you not likely to catch not only the cow-pox, but any other
disease that the child has from whom the matter is taken?_

The same objection holds good in cutting for small-pox
(inoculation)—only in a tenfold degree—small-pox being such a disgusting
complaint. Inoculated small-pox frequently produced and left behind
inveterate “breakings-out,” scars, cicatrices, and indentations of the
skin, sore eyes, blindness, loss of eyelashes, scrofula,
deafness—indeed, a long catalogue of loathsome diseases. A medical man,
of course, will be careful to take the cow-pox matter from a healthy
child.

49. _Would it not be well to take the matter direct from the cow?_

If a doctor be careful—which, of course, he will be—to take the matter
from a healthy child, and from a well-formed vesicle, I consider it
better than taking it _direct_ from the cow, for the following reasons:
The cow-pox lymph, taken direct from the cow, produces much more violent
symptoms than after it has passed through several persons; indeed, in
some cases, it has produced effects as severe as cutting for the
small-pox; besides, it has caused, in many cases, violent inflammation
and even sloughing of the arm. There are also several kinds of
_spurious_ cow-pox to which the cow is subject, and which would be
likely to be mistaken for the _real_ lymph. Again, if even the _genuine_
matter were not taken from the cow _exactly_ at the proper time, it
would be deprived of its protecting power.

50. _At what age do you recommend an infant to be first vaccinated?_

When he is two months old, as the sooner he is protected the better.
Moreover, the older he is the greater will be the difficulty in making
him submit to the operation, and in preventing his arm from being
rubbed, thus endangering the breaking of the vesicles, and thereby
interfering with its effects. If small-pox be prevalent in the
neighborhood, he may, with perfect safety, be vaccinated at the month’s
end; indeed, if the small-pox be near at hand, he _must_ be vaccinated,
regardless of his age and regardless of everything else, for small-pox
spares neither the young nor the old, and if a new-born babe should
unfortunately catch the disease, he will most likely die, as at his
tender age he would not have strength to battle with such a formidable
enemy. “A case in the General Lying-in-Hospital, Lambeth, of small-pox
occurred in a woman a few days after her admission and the birth of her
child. Her own child was vaccinated when only four days old, and all the
other infants in the house, varying from one day to a fortnight and
more. All took the vaccination; and the woman’s own child, which suckled
her and slept with her; and all escaped the small-pox.” Communicated by
Sir Charles Locock to the author.

51. _Do you consider that the taking of matter from a child’s arm
weakens the effect of vaccination on the system?_

Certainly not, provided it has taken effect in more than one place. The
arm is frequently much inflamed, and vaccinating other children from it
abates the inflammation, and thus affords relief. _It is always well to
leave one vesicle undisturbed?_

52. _If the infant has any “breaking-out” upon the skin, ought that to
be a reason for deferring the vaccination?_

It should, as two skin diseases cannot well go on together; hence the
cow-pox might not take, or, if it did, might not have its proper effect
in preventing small-pox. “It is essential that the vaccine bud or germ
have a congenial soil, uncontaminated by another poison, which, like a
weed, might choke its healthy growth.” The moment the skin be free from
the breaking-out, he must be vaccinated. A trifling skin affection, like
red gum, unless it be severe, ought not, at the proper age, to prevent
vaccination. If small-pox be rife in the neighborhood, the child _must_
be vaccinated, regardless of _any_ “breaking-out” on the skin.

53. _Does vaccination make a child poorly?_

At about the fifth day after vaccination, and for three or four days, he
is generally a little feverish; the mouth is slightly hot, and he
delights to have the nipple in his mouth. He does not rest so well at
night; he is rather cross and irritable; and, sometimes, has a slight
bowel complaint. The arm, about the ninth or tenth day, is usually much
inflamed—that is to say, it is, for an inch or two or more around the
vesicles, red, hot, and swollen, and continues in this state for a day
or two, at the end of which time the inflammation gradually subsides. It
might be well to state that the above slight symptoms are desirable, as
it proves that the vaccination has had a proper effect on his system,
and that, consequently, he is more likely to be thoroughly protected
from any risk of catching small-pox.

54. _Do you approve, either during or after vaccination, of giving
medicine, more especially if he be a little feverish?_

No; as it would be likely to work off some of its effects, and thus
would rob the cow-pox of its efficacy on the system. I do not like to
interfere with vaccination _in any way whatever_ (except, at the proper
time, to take a little matter from the arm), but to allow the pock to
have full power upon his constitution.

What do you give the medicine for? If the matter that is put into the
arm be healthy, what need is there of physic? And if the matter be not
of a good quality, I am quite sure that no physic will make it so! Look,
therefore, at the case in whatever way you like, physic after
vaccination is _not_ necessary; but, on the contrary, hurtful. If the
vaccination produce a slight feverish attack it will, without the
administration of a particle of medicine, subside in two or three days.

55. _Have you any directions to give respecting the arm_ AFTER
_vaccination_?

The only precaution necessary, is to take care that the arm be not
rubbed; otherwise the vesicles may be prematurely broken, and the
efficacy of the vaccination may be lessened. The sleeve, in vaccination,
ought to be large and soft, and should _not_ be tied up. The tying up of
a sleeve makes it hard, and is much more likely to rub the vesicles than
if it were put on in the usual way.

56. _If the arm_, AFTER _vaccination, be much inflamed, what ought to be
done_?

Smear frequently, by means of a feather or a camel’s-hair brush, a
little cream on the inflamed part. This simple remedy will afford great
relief and comfort.

57. _Have the goodness to describe the proper appearance, after the
falling off of the scab, of the arm?_

It might be well to remark that the scabs ought always to be allowed to
fall off of themselves. They must not, on any account, be picked or
meddled with. With regard to the proper appearance of the arm after the
falling off of the scab, “a perfect vaccine scar should be of small
size, circular, and marked with radiations and indentations.”




                               DENTITION.


58. _At what time does dentition commence?_

The period at which it commences is uncertain. It may, as a rule, be
said that a babe begins to cut his teeth at seven months old. Some have
cut teeth at three months; indeed, there are instances on record of
infants having been born with teeth. King Richard the Third is said to
have been an example. Shakspeare notices it thus:

  “YORK.—Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
          That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old;
          ’Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
          Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.”
                                                      _Act 2, sc, 5._

When a babe is born with teeth they generally drop out. On the other
hand, teething in some children does not commence until they are a year
and a half or two years old, and, in rare cases, not until they are
three years old. There are cases recorded of adults who have never cut
any teeth. An instance of the kind came under my own observation.

Dentition has been known to occur in old age. A case is recorded by M.
Carre, in the _Gazette Medicale de Paris_ (Sept. 15, 1860), of an old
lady, aged eighty-five, who cut several teeth after attaining that age!

59. _What is the number of the_ FIRST _set of teeth, and in what order
do they generally appear_?

The first or temporary set consists of twenty. The first set of teeth
are usually cut in pairs. “I may say that nearly invariably the order
is—1st, the lower front incisors [cutting-teeth], then the upper front,
then the _upper_ two lateral incisors, and that not uncommonly a double
tooth is cut before the two _lower_ laterals; but at all events the
lower laterals come 7th and 8th, and not 5th and 6th, as nearly all
books on the subject testify.” [Sir Charles Locock, in a _Letter_ to the
Author.] Then the first grinders in the lower jaw, afterward the first
upper grinders, then the lower corner pointed or canine teeth, after
which the upper corner or eye-teeth, then the second grinders in the
lower jaw, and lastly, the second grinders of the upper jaw. They do
not, of course, always appear in this rotation. Nothing is more
uncertain than the order of teething. A child seldom cuts his second
grinders until after he is two years old. _He is usually, from the time
they first appear, two years in cutting his first set of teeth._ As a
rule, therefore, a child of two years old has sixteen, and one of two
years and a half old, twenty teeth.

60. _If an infant be either feverish or irritable, or otherwise poorly,
and if the gums be hot, swollen, and tender, are you an advocate for
their being lanced?_

Certainly; by doing so he will, in the generality of instances, be
almost instantly relieved.

61. _But it has been stated that lancing the gums hardens them?_

This is a mistake—it has a contrary effect. It is a well-known fact that
a part which has been divided gives way much more readily than one which
has not been cut. Again, the tooth is bound down by a tight membrane,
which, if not released by lancing, frequently brings on convulsions. If
the symptoms be urgent, it may be necessary from time to time to repeat
the lancing.

It would, of course, be the height of folly to lance the gums unless
they be hot and swollen, and unless the tooth or the teeth be near at
hand. It is not to be considered a panacea for every baby’s ill,
although, in those cases where the lancing of the gums is indicated, the
beneficial effect is sometimes almost magical.

62. _How ought the lancing of a child’s gums to be performed?_

The proper person, of course, to lance his gums is a medical man. But,
if perchance you should be miles away and be out of the reach of one, it
would be well for you to know how the operation ought to be performed.
Well, then, let him lie on the nurse’s lap upon his back, and let the
nurse take hold of his hands, in order that he may not interfere with
the operation.

Then, _if it be the upper gum_ that requires lancing, you ought to go to
the head of the child, looking over, as it were, and into his mouth, and
should steady the gum with the index finger of your left hand; then you
should take hold of the gum-lancet with your right hand—holding it as if
it were a table-knife at dinner—and cut firmly along the inflamed and
swollen gum and down to the tooth, until the edge of the gum-lancet
grates on the tooth. Each incision ought to extend along the ridge of
the gum to about the extent of each expected tooth.

_If it be the lower gum_ that requires lancing, you must go to the side
of the child, and should steady the outside of the jaw with the fingers
of the left hand, and the gum with the left thumb, and then you should
perform the operation as before directed.

Although the lancing of the gums, to make it intelligible to a
non-professional person, requires a long description, it is, in point of
fact, a simple affair, is soon performed, and gives but little pain.

63. _If teething cause convulsions, what ought to be done?_

The first thing to be done (after sending for a medical man) is to
freely dash cold water upon the face, and to sponge the head with cold
water, and as soon as warm water can be procured, to put him into a warm
bath of 98 degrees Fahrenheit. For the precautions to be used in putting
a child into a warm bath, see the answer to question on “Warm baths.”

No family where there are young children, should be without Fahrenheit’s
thermometer. If a thermometer be not at hand, you must plunge your own
elbow into the water: a comfortable heat for your elbow will be the
proper heat for the infant. He must remain in the bath for a quarter of
an hour, or until the fit be at an end. The body must, after coming out
of the bath, be wiped with warm and dry and coarse towels; he ought then
to be placed in a warm blanket. The gums must be lanced, and cold water
should be applied to the head. An enema, composed of table salt, of
olive oil, and warm oatmeal gruel—in the proportion of one tablespoonful
of salt, of one of oil, and a teacupful of gruel—ought then to be
administered, and should, until the bowels have been well opened, be
repeated every quarter of an hour; as soon as he comes to himself a dose
of aperient medicine ought to be given.

64. _A nurse is in the habit of giving a child who is teething either
coral or ivory to bite—do you approve of the plan?_

I think it a bad practice to give him any hard, unyielding substance, as
it tends to harden the gums, and by so doing causes the teeth to come
through with greater difficulty. I have found softer substances, such as
either a piece of wax-taper, or an india-rubber ring, or a piece of the
best bridle-leather, or a crust of bread, of great service. If a piece
of crust be given as a gum-stick, he must, while biting it, be well
watched, or by accident he might loosen a large piece of it, which might
choke him. The pressure of any of these excites a more rapid absorption
of the gum, and thus causes the tooth to come through more easily and
quickly.

65. _Have you any objection to my baby, when he is cutting his teeth,
sucking his thumb?_

Certainly not; the thumb is the best gum-stick in the world—it is
convenient, it is handy (in every sense of the word), it is of the right
size, and of the proper consistence—neither too hard nor too soft; there
is no danger, as of some artificial gum-sticks, of its being swallowed,
and thus of its choking the child. The sucking of the thumb causes the
salivary glands to pour out their contents, and thus not only to moisten
the dry mouth, but assists the digestion; the pressure of the thumb
eases, while the teeth are “breeding,” the pain and irritation of the
gums, and helps, when the teeth are sufficiently advanced, to bring them
through the gums. Sucking of the thumb will often make a cross infant
contented and happy, and will frequently induce a restless babe to fall
into a sweet refreshing sleep. Truly may the thumb be called a baby’s
comfort. By all means, then, let your child suck his thumb whenever he
likes, and as long as he chooses to do so.

There is a charming, bewitching little picture of a babe sucking his
thumb in Kingsley’s _Water Babies_, which I cordially commend to your
favorable notice and study.

66. _But if an infant be allowed to suck his thumb, will it not be
likely to become a habit, and stick to him for years—until, indeed, he
become a big boy?_

After he has cut the whole of his first set of teeth, that is to say,
when he is about two years and a half old, he might, if it be likely to
become a habit, be readily cured by the following method, namely, by
making a paste of aloes and water and smearing it upon his thumb. One or
two dressings will suffice, as after just tasting the bitter aloes he
will take a disgust to his former enjoyment, and the habit will at once
be broken.

Many persons, I know, have an objection to children sucking their
thumbs, as, for instance—

        “Perhaps it’s as well to keep children from plums,
        And from pears in the season, and sucking their thumbs.”

My reply is—

          P’rhaps ’tis as well to keep children from pears;
          The pain they might cause is oft followed by tears;
          ’Tis certainly well to keep them from plums;
          But certainly not from sucking their thumbs!
                    If a babe suck his thumb
                    ’Tis an ease to his gum;
          A comfort; a boon; a calmer of grief;
          A friend in his need, affording relief;
          A solace; a good; a soother of pain;
          A composer to sleep; a charm; and a gain;
          ’Tis handy at once to his sweet mouth to glide;
          When done with, drops gently down by his side;
          ’Tis fixed like an anchor while the babe sleeps,
          And the mother with joy her still vigil keeps.

67. _A child who is teething dribbles, and thereby wets his chest, which
frequently causes him to catch cold; what had better be done?_

Have in readiness to put on several _flannel_ dribbling-bibs, so that
they may be changed as often as they become wet; or, if he dribble _very
much_, the oiled silk dribbling-bibs, instead of the flannel ones, may
be used, and which may be procured at any baby-linen warehouse.

68. _Do you approve of giving a child, during teething, much fruit?_

No; unless it be a few ripe strawberries or raspberries, or a roasted
apple, or the juice of five or six grapes—taking care that he does not
swallow either the seeds or the skin—or the insides of ripe
gooseberries, or an orange. Such fruits, if the bowels be in a costive
state, will be particularly useful.

All stone fruits, _raw_ apples, or pears ought to be carefully avoided,
as they not only disorder the stomach and the bowels—causing
convulsions, gripings, etc.—but they have the effect of weakening the
bowels, and thus of engendering worms.

69. _Is a child, during teething, more subject to disease, and if so, to
what complaints, and in what manner may they be prevented?_

The teeth are a fruitful source of suffering and of disease, and are
with truth styled “our first and our last plagues.” Dentition is the
most important period of a child’s life, and is the exciting cause of
many infantile diseases; during this period, therefore, he requires
constant and careful watching. When we consider how the teeth elongate
and enlarge in his gums, pressing on the nerves and on the surrounding
parts, and thus how frequently they produce pain, irritation, and
inflammation; when we further contemplate what sympathy there is in the
nervous system, and how susceptible the young are to pain, no surprise
can be felt at the immense disturbance and the consequent suffering and
danger frequently experienced by children while cutting their _first_
set of teeth.

The complaints or the diseases induced by dentition are numberless,
affecting almost every organ of the body,—the _brain_, occasioning
convulsions, water on the brain, etc.; the _lungs_, producing
congestion, inflammation, cough, etc.; the _stomach_, exciting sickness,
flatulence, acidity, etc.; the _bowels_, inducing griping, at one time
costiveness, and at another time purging; the _skin_, causing
“breakings-out.”

To prevent these diseases, means ought to be used to invigorate a
child’s constitution by plain, wholesome food, as recommended under the
article of diet; by exercise and fresh air; by allowing him, weather
permitting, to be out of doors a great part of every day; by lancing the
gums when they get red, hot, and swollen; by attention to the bowels,
and if he suffer more than usual, by keeping them rather in a relaxed
state by any simple aperient, such as either castor oil or magnesia and
rhubarb, etc.; and, let me add, by attention to his temper. Many
children are made feverish and ill by petting and spoiling them. On this
subject I cannot do better than refer you to an excellent little work
entitled Abbott’s _Mother at Home_, wherein the author proves the great
importance of _early_ training. The young of animals seldom suffer from
cutting their teeth—and what is the reason? Because they live in the
open air and take plenty of exercise, while children are frequently
cooped up in close rooms and are not allowed the free use of their
limbs. The value of fresh air is well exemplified in the
Registrar-General’s Report for 1843: he says that in 1,000,000 deaths
from all diseases, 616 occur in the town from teething, while 120 only
take place in the country from the same cause.

70. _Have the goodness to describe the symptoms and the treatment of
Painful Dentition._

Painful dentition may be divided into two forms—(1.) the Mild; and (2.)
the Severe. In the _mild_ form the child is peevish and fretful, and
puts his fingers, and everything within reach, to his mouth; he likes to
have his gums rubbed, and takes the breast with avidity; indeed, it
seems a greater comfort to him than ever. There is generally a
considerable flow of saliva, and he has frequently a more loose state of
bowels than is his wont.

Now, with regard to the more _severe_ form of painful dentition: The
gums are red, swollen, and hot, and he cannot, without expressing pain,
bear to have them touched; hence, if he be at the breast, he is
constantly loosing the nipple. There is dryness of the mouth, although
before there had been a great flow of saliva. He is feverish, restless,
and starts in his sleep. His face is flushed. His head is heavy and hot.
He is sometimes convulsed. (See answer to Question 63.) He is frequently
violently griped and purged, and suffers severely from flatulence. He is
predisposed to many and severe diseases.

The _treatment_ of the _mild_ form consists of friction of the gums with
the finger; with a little “soothing syrup,” as recommended by Sir
Charles Locock; a tepid bath of about 92 degrees Fahrenheit, every night
at bedtime; attention to diet and bowels; fresh air and exercise.
“‘Soothing Syrup.’ Some of them probably contain opiates, but a
perfectly safe and useful one is a little nitrate of potassa in syrup of
roses—one scruple to half an ounce.”—Communicated by Sir Charles Locock
to the Author. For the mild form, the above plan will usually be all
that is required. If he dribble and the bowels be relaxed, so much the
better; the flow of saliva and the increased action of the bowels afford
relief, and therefore must not be interfered with. In the _mild_ form
lancing of the gums is not desirable. The gums ought not to be lanced
unless the teeth be near at hand, and unless the gums be red, hot, and
swollen.

In the _severe_ form a medical man should be consulted early, as more
energetic remedies will be demanded; that is to say, the gums will
require to be freely lanced, warm baths to be used, and medicines to be
given, to ward off mischief from the head, from the chest, and from the
stomach.

If you are living in the town and your baby suffers much from teething,
take him into the country. It is wonderful what change of air to the
country will often do, in relieving a child who is painfully cutting his
teeth. The number of deaths in London from teething is frightful; it is
in the country comparatively trifling.

71. _Should an infant be purged during teething, or indeed, during any
other time, do you approve of either absorbent or astringent medicines
to restrain it?_

Certainly not. I should look upon the relaxation as an effort of nature
to relieve itself. A child is never purged without a cause; that cause,
in the generality of instances, is the presence of either some
undigested food, or acidity, or depraved motions that want a vent.

The better plan is, in such a case, to give a dose of aperient medicine,
such as either castor oil or magnesia and rhubarb, and thus work it off.
IF WE LOCK UP THE BOWELS, WE CONFINE THE ENEMY, AND THUS PRODUCE
MISCHIEF. [“I should put this in capitals, it is so important and so
often mistaken.”—C. Locock.] If he be purged more than usual, attention
should be paid to the diet—if it be absolutely necessary to give him
artificial food while suckling—and care must be taken not to overload
the stomach.

72. _A child is subject to a slight cough during dentition—called by
nurses “tooth-cough”—which a parent would not consider of sufficient
importance to consult a doctor about; pray tell me if there is any
objection to a mother giving her child a small quantity either of syrup
of white poppies or of paregoric to ease it?_

A cough is an effort of nature to bring up any secretion from the lining
membrane of the lungs, or from the bronchial tubes, hence it ought not
to be interfered with. I have known the administration of syrup of white
poppies, or of paregoric, to stop the cough, and thereby to prevent the
expulsion of the phlegm, and thus to produce either inflammation of the
lungs or bronchitis. Moreover, both paregoric and syrup of white poppies
are, for a young child, dangerous medicines (unless administered by a
judicious medical man), and _ought never to be given by a mother_.

In the month of April, 1844, I was sent for in great haste to an infant,
aged seventeen months, who was laboring under convulsions and extreme
drowsiness, from the injudicious administration of paregoric, which had
been given to him to ease a cough. By the prompt administration of an
emetic he was saved.

73. _A child who is teething is subject to a “breaking-out,” more
especially behind the ears—which is most disfiguring, and frequently
very annoying; what would you recommend?_

I would apply no external application to cure it, as I should look upon
it as an effort of the constitution to relieve itself; and should
expect, if the “breaking-out” were repelled, that either convulsions, or
bronchitis, or inflammation of the lungs, or water on the brain would be
the consequence.

The only plan I should adopt would be, to be more careful in his diet:
to give him less meat (if he be old enough to eat animal food), and to
give him, once or twice a week, a few doses of mild aperient medicine;
and, if the irritation from the “breaking-out” be great, to bathe it
occasionally either with a little warm milk and water, or with rose
water.




                               EXERCISE.


74. _Do you recommend exercise in the open air for a baby? and if so,
how soon after birth?_

I am a great advocate for having exercise in the open air. “The infant
in arms makes known its desire for fresh air by restlessness—it cries,
for it cannot speak its wants: is taken abroad, and is quiet.”

The age at which he ought to commence taking exercise will, of course,
depend upon the season and upon the weather. If it be summer, and the
weather be fine, he should be carried in the open air a week or a
fortnight after birth; but if it be winter, he ought not, on any
account, to be taken out under the month, and not even then, unless the
weather be mild for the season, and it be the middle of the day. At the
end of two months he should breathe the open air more frequently. And
after the expiration of three months he ought to be carried out _every
day_, even if it be wet under foot, provided it be fine above, and the
wind be neither in an easterly nor in a northeasterly direction; by
doing so we shall make him strong and hearty, and give the skin that
mettled appearance which is so characteristic of health. He must, of
course, be well clothed.

I cannot help expressing my disapprobation of the practice of smothering
up an infant’s face with a handkerchief, with a veil, or with any other
covering, when he is taken out into the air. If his face be so muffled
up, he may as well remain at home; as, under such circumstances, it is
impossible for him to receive any benefit from the invigorating effects
of the fresh air.

75. _Can you devise any method to induce a baby himself to take
exercise?_

He must be encouraged to use muscular exertion; and, for this purpose,
he ought to be frequently laid either upon a rug, or carpet, or the
floor: he will then stretch his limbs and kick about with perfect glee.
It is a pretty sight, to see a little fellow kicking and sprawling on
the floor. He crows with delight, and thoroughly enjoys himself: it
strengthens his back; it enables him to stretch his limbs, and to use
his muscles; and is one of the best kinds of exercise a very young child
can take. While going through his performances, his diaper, if he wear
one, should be unfastened, in order that he might go through his
exercises untrammeled. By adopting the above plan, the babe quietly
enjoys himself—his brain is not over-excited by it; this is an important
consideration, for both mothers and nurses are apt to rouse and excite
very young children, to their manifest detriment. A babe requires rest,
and not excitement. How wrong it is, then, for either a mother or a
nurse to be exciting and rousing a new-born babe. It is most injurious
and weakening to his brain. In the early period of his existence his
time ought to be almost entirely spent in sleeping and in sucking!

76. _Do you approve of tossing an infant much about?_

I have seen a child tossed up nearly to the ceiling! Can anything be
more cruel or absurd? Violent tossing of a young babe ought never to be
allowed: it only frightens him, and has been known to bring on
convulsions. He should be gently moved up and down (not tossed): such
exercise causes a proper circulation of the blood, promotes digestion,
and soothes to sleep. He must always be kept quiet immediately after
taking the breast: if he be tossed _directly_ afterward, it interferes
with his digestion, and is likely to produce sickness.




                                 SLEEP.


77. _Ought the infant’s sleeping apartment to be kept warm?_

The lying-in room is generally kept too warm, its heat being, in many
instances, more that of an oven than of a room. Such a place is most
unhealthy, and is fraught with danger both to the mother and the baby.
We are not, of course, to run into an opposite extreme, but are to keep
the chamber at a moderate and comfortable temperature. The door ought
occasionally to be left ajar, in order the more effectually to change
the air and thus to make it more pure and sweet.

A new-born babe, then, ought to be kept comfortably warm, but not very
warm. It is folly in the extreme to attempt to harden a very young child
either by allowing him, in the winter time, to be in a bed-room without
a fire, or by dipping him in _cold_ water, or by keeping him with scant
clothing on his bed. The temperature of a bed-room, in the winter time,
should be, as nearly as possible, at 60° Fahr. Although the room should
be comfortably warm, it ought, from time to time, to be properly
ventilated. An unventilated room soon becomes foul, and, therefore,
unhealthy. How many in this world, both children and adults, are
“poisoned with their own breaths!”

An infant should not be allowed to look at the glare either of a fire or
of a lighted candle, as the glare tends to weaken the sight, and
sometimes brings on an inflammation of the eyes. In speaking to and in
noticing a baby, you ought always to stand _before_ and not _behind_
him, or it might make him squint.

78. _Ought a babe to lie alone from the first?_

Certainly not. At first—say for the first few months—he requires the
warmth of another person’s body, especially in the winter; but care must
be taken not to overlay him, as many infants, from carelessness in this
particular, have lost their lives. After the first few months, he had
better lie alone, on a horse-hair mattress.

79. _Do you approve of rocking an infant to sleep?_

I do not. If the rules of health be observed, he will sleep both soundly
and sweetly without rocking; if they be not, the rocking might cause him
to fall into a feverish, disturbed slumber, but not into a refreshing,
calm sleep. Besides, if you once take to that habit, he will not go to
sleep without it.

80. _Then don’t you approve of a rocking-chair, and of rockers to the
cradle?_

Certainly not: a rocking-chair, or rockers to the cradle, may be useful
to a lazy nurse or mother, and may induce a child to sleep, but that
restlessly, when he does not need sleep, or when he is wet and
uncomfortable, and requires “changing;” but will not cause him to have
that sweet and gentle and exquisite slumber so characteristic of a baby
who has no artificial appliances to make him sleep. No! rockers are
perfectly unnecessary, and the sooner they are banished the nursery the
better will it be for the infant community. I do not know a more
wearisome and monotonous sound than the everlasting rockings to and fro
in some nurseries; they are often accompanied by a dolorous lullaby from
the nurse, which adds much to the misery and depressing influence of the
performance.

81. _While the infant is asleep, do you advise the head of the crib to
be covered with a handkerchief, to shade his eyes from the light, and,
if it be summer time, to keep off the flies?_

If the head of the crib be covered, the baby cannot breathe freely; the
air within the crib becomes contaminated, and thus the lungs cannot
properly perform their functions. If his sleep is to be refreshing, he
must breathe pure air. I do not even approve of a head to a crib. A
child is frequently allowed to sleep on a bed with the curtains drawn
completely close, as though it were dangerous for a breath of air to
blow upon him! This practice is most injurious. An infant must have the
full benefit of the air of the room; indeed, the bed-room door ought to
be frequently left ajar, so that the air of the apartment may be
changed—taking care, of course, not to expose him to a draught. If the
flies while he is asleep, annoy him, let a _net_ veil be thrown over his
face, as he can readily breathe through net, but not through a
handkerchief. I have somewhere read that if a cage containing a canary,
be suspended at night within a bed where a person is sleeping, and the
curtains be drawn closely around, that the bird will, in the morning, in
all probability be found dead!

82. _Have you any suggestions to offer as to the way a babe should be
dressed when he is put down to sleep?_

Whenever he be put down to sleep, be more than usually particular that
his dress be loose in every part; be careful that there be neither
strings nor bands to cramp him. Let him, then, during repose, be more
than ordinarily free and unrestrained—

            “If, while in cradled rest your infant sleeps,
            Your watchful eye unceasing vigils keeps,
            Lest cramping bonds his pliant limbs constrain,
            And cause defects that manhood may retain.”

83. _Is it a good sign for a young child to sleep much?_

A babe who sleeps a great deal thrives much more than one who does not.
I have known many children who were born small and delicate, but who
slept the greatest part of their time, become strong and healthy. On the
other hand, I have known those who were born large and strong, yet who
slept but little, become weak and unhealthy.

The common practice of a nurse allowing a baby to sleep upon her lap is
a bad one, and ought never to be countenanced. He sleeps cooler, more
comfortably, and soundly in his crib.

The younger an infant is the more he generally sleeps, so that during
the early months he is seldom awake, and then only to take the breast.
It may be interesting to a mother to know the average weight of new-born
infants. There is a paper on the subject in the _Medical Circular_ and
which has been abridged in _Braithwaite’s Retrospect of Medicine_. The
following are extracts: “Dr. E. von Siebold presents a table of the
weights of 3000 infants (1586 male and 1414 female), weighed immediately
after birth. From this table (for which we have not space) it results
that by far the greater number of the children (2215) weighed between 6
and 8 lbs. From 5¾ to 6 lbs. the number rose from 99 to 268; and from 8
to 8¼ lbs. they fell from 226 to 67, and never rose again at any weight
to 100. From 8¾ to 9½ lbs. they sank from 61 to 8, rising, however, at
9½ lbs. to 21. Only six weighed 10 lbs., one 10¾ lbs., and two 11 lbs.
The author has never but once met with a child weighing 11¾ lbs. The
most frequent weight in the 3000 was 7 lbs., numbering 426. It is a
remarkable fact, that until the weight of 7 lbs. the female infants
exceeded the males in number, the latter thenceforward predominating.

“... From these statements, and those of various other authors here
quoted, the conclusion may be drawn that the normal weight of a mature
new-born infant is not less than 6 nor more than 8 lbs., the average
weight being 6½ or 7 lbs., the smaller number referring to female and
the higher to male infants.”

84. _How is it that much sleep causes a young child to thrive so well?_

If there be pain in any part of the body, or if any of the functions be
not properly performed, he sleeps but little. On the contrary, if there
be exemption from pain, and if there be a due performance of all the
functions, he sleeps a great deal; and thus the body becomes refreshed
and invigorated.

85. _As much sleep is of such advantage, if an infant sleep but little,
would you advise composing medicine to be given to him?_

Certainly not. The practice of giving composing medicine to a young
child cannot be too strongly reprobated. If he does not sleep enough,
the mother ought to ascertain if the bowels be in a proper state,
whether they be sufficiently opened that the motions be of a good
color—namely, a bright yellow, inclining to orange color—and free from
slime or from had smell. An occasional dose of rhubarb and magnesia is
frequently the best composing medicine he can take.

86. _We often hear of Coroner’s inquests upon infants who have been
found dead in bed—accidentally overlaid: what is usually the cause?_

Suffocation, produced either by ignorance or by carelessness. From
_ignorance_ in mothers, in their not knowing the common laws of life,
and the vital importance of free and unrestricted respiration, not only
when babies are up and about, but when they are in bed and asleep. From
_carelessness_, in their allowing young and thoughtless servants to have
the charge of infants at night; more especially as young girls are
usually heavy sleepers, and are thus too much overpowered with sleep to
attend to their necessary duties.

A foolish mother sometimes goes to sleep while allowing her child to
continue sucking. The unconscious babe, after a time, looses the nipple,
and buries his head in the bedclothes. She awakes in the morning,
finding, to her horror, a corpse by her side! A mother ought, therefore,
never to go to sleep until her child has finished sucking.

_The following are a few rules to prevent an infant from being
accidentally overlaid_: (1.) Let your baby, while asleep, have plenty of
room in bed. (2.) Do not allow him to be too near to you; or if he be
unavoidably near to you (from the small size of the bed), let his face
be turned to the opposite side. (3.) Let him lie fairly either on his
side or on his back. (4.) Be careful to ascertain that his mouth be not
covered with the bedclothes; and (5.) Do not smother his face with
clothes, as a plentiful supply of pure air is as necessary when he is
awake, or even more so, than when he is asleep. (6.) Never let him lie
low in the bed. (7.) Let there be _no_ pillow near the one his head is
resting on, lest he roll to it, and thus bury his head in it. Remember,
a young child has neither the strength nor the sense to get out of
danger; and, if he unfortunately either turn on his face, or bury his
head in a pillow that is near, the chances are that he will be
suffocated, more especially as these accidents usually occur at night,
when the mother or the nurse is fast asleep. (8.) Never intrust him at
night to a young, giddy, and thoughtless servant.




                THE BLADDER AND THE BOWELS OF AN INFANT.


87. _Have you any hints to offer respecting the bowels and the bladder
of an infant during the first three months of his existence?_

A mother ought daily to satisfy herself as to the state of the bladder
and the bowels of her child. She herself should inspect the motions, and
see that they are of a proper color (bright yellow, inclining to orange)
and consistence (that of thick gruel), that they are neither slimy, nor
curdled, nor green; if they should be either the one or the other, it is
a proof that she herself has, in all probability, been imprudent in her
diet, and that it will be necessary for the future that she be more
careful both in what she eats and in what she drinks.

She ought, moreover, to satisfy herself that the urine does not smell
strongly, that it does not stain the napkins, and that he make a
sufficient quantity.

A frequent cause of a child crying is, he is wet and uncomfortable, and
wants drying and changing, and the only way he has of informing his
mother of the fact is by crying lustily, and thus telling her in most
expressive language of her thoughtlessness and carelessness.

88. _How soon may an infant dispense with napkins?_

A baby three months and upward, ought to be held out at least a dozen
times during the twenty-four hours; if such a plan were adopted, napkins
might at the end of three months be dispensed with—a great
_desideratum_—and he would be inducted into clean habits—a blessing to
himself, and a comfort to all around, and a great saving of dresses and
of furniture. “Teach your children to be clean. A dirty child is the
mother’s disgrace.” Truer words were never written: A DIRTY CHILD IS THE
MOTHER’S DISGRACE!




                        AILMENTS, DISEASE, ETC.


89. _A new-born babe frequently has a collection of mucus in the
air-passages, causing him to wheeze: is it a dangerous symptom?_

No, not if it occur _immediately_ after birth; as soon as the bowels
have been opened, it generally leaves him, or even before, if he give a
good cry, which as soon as he is born he usually does. If there be any
mucus either within or about the mouth, impeding breathing, it must with
a soft handkerchief be removed.

90. _Is it advisable, as soon as an infant is born, to give him
medicine?_

It is now proved that the giving of medicine to a babe _immediately_
after birth is unnecessary, nay, that it is hurtful—that is, provided he
be early put to the breast, as the mother’s _first_ milk is generally
sufficient to open the bowels. Sir Charles Locock makes the following
sensible remarks on the subject: “I used to limit any aperient to a
new-born infant to those which had not the first milk, and who had
wet-nurses whose milk was, of course, some weeks old; but for many years
I have never allowed any aperient at all to any new-born infant, and I
am satisfied it is the safest and the wisest plan.”

This advice of Sir Charles Locock—_to give no aperient to a new-born
infant_—is most valuable, and ought to be strictly followed. By adopting
his recommendation much after-misery might be averted. If a new-born
babe’s bowels be costive, rather than give him an aperient, try the
effect of a little moist sugar dissolved in a little water; that is to
say, dissolve half a teaspoonful of pure unadulterated _raw_ sugar in a
teaspoonful of warm water, and administer it to him; if in four hours it
should not operate, repeat the dose. Butter and raw sugar is a popular
remedy, and is sometimes used by a nurse to open the bowels of a
new-born babe, and where there is costiveness answers the purpose
exceedingly well, and is far superior to castor oil. Try, by all means
to do, if possible, without a particle of opening medicine. If you once
begin to give aperients, you will have frequently to repeat them.
Opening physic leads to opening physic, until at length his stomach and
bowels will become a physic shop! Let me, then, emphatically say, avoid,
if possible, giving a new-born babe a drop or a grain of opening
medicine. If from the first you refrain from giving an aperient, he
seldom requires one afterward. It is the _first_ step that is so
important to take in this as in all other things.

If a new-born babe has _not_ for twelve hours made water, the medical
man ought to be informed of it, in order that he may inquire into the
matter and apply the proper remedies. Be particular in attending to
these directions, or evil consequences will inevitably ensue.

91. _Some persons say that new-born female infants have milk in their
bosoms, and that it is necessary to squeeze them, and apply plasters to
disperse the milk._

The idea of there being real milk in a baby’s breast is doubtful, the
squeezing of the bosom is barbarous, and the application of plasters is
useless. “Without actually saying,” says Sir Charles Locock, “there is
milk secreted in the breasts of infants, there is undoubtedly not rarely
considerable swelling of the breasts both in _female_ and _male_
infants, and on squeezing them a serous fluid oozes out. I agree with
you that the nurses should never be allowed to squeeze them, but be
ordered to leave them alone.”

92. _Have the goodness to mention the_ SLIGHT _ailments which are not of
sufficient importance to demand the assistance of a medical man_?

I deem it well to make the distinction between _serious_ and _slight_
ailments; I am addressing a mother. With regard to _serious_ ailments, I
do not think myself justified, except in certain _urgent_ cases, in
instructing a parent to deal with them. It might be well to make a
mother acquainted with the _symptoms_, but not with the _treatment_, in
order that she might lose no time in calling in medical aid. This I hope
to have the pleasure of doing in future conversations.

_Serious_ diseases, _with a few exceptions_, and which I will indicate
in subsequent conversations, ought never to be treated by a parent, not
even in the _early_ stages, for it is in the early stages that the most
good can generally be done. It is utterly impossible for any one who is
not trained to the medical profession to understand a _serious_ disease
in all its bearings, and thereby to treat it satisfactorily.

There are some exceptions to these remarks. It will be seen, in future
conversations, that Sir Charles Locock considers that a mother ought to
be made acquainted with the _treatment_ of _some_ of the more _serious_
diseases, where delay in obtaining _immediate_ medical assistance might
be death. I bow to his superior judgment, and have supplied the
deficiency in subsequent conversations.

The ailments and the diseases of infants, such as may, in the absence of
the doctor, be treated by a parent, are the following: Chafings,
Convulsions, Costiveness, Flatulence, Gripings, Hiccup, Looseness of the
Bowels (Diarrhœa), Dysentery, Nettle-rash, Red-gum, Stuffing of the
Nose, Sickness, Thrush. In all these complaints I will tell you—_What to
do_, and—_What_ NOT _to do_.

93. _What are the causes and the treatment of chafing?_

The want of water: inattention and want of cleanliness are the usual
causes of chafing.

_What to do._—The chafed parts ought to be well and thoroughly sponged
with tepid _rain_ water—allowing the water from a well-filled sponge to
stream over them—and, afterward, they should be thoroughly but tenderly
dried with a soft towel, and then be dusted, either with finely-powdered
starch made of wheaten flour, or with violet powder, or with
finely-powdered native carbonate of zinc, or they should be bathed with
finely-powdered fuller’s-earth and tepid water.

[Illustration: INFANCY.—THE FIRST STEP.]

If, in a few days, the parts be not healed, discontinue the above
treatment, and use the following application: Beat up well together the
whites of two eggs, then add, drop by drop, two tablespoonfuls of
brandy. When well mixed put it into a bottle and cork it up. Before
using it let the excoriated parts be gently bathed with lukewarm rain
water, and, with a soft napkin, be tenderly dried; then, by means of a
camel’s-hair brush, apply the above liniment, having first shaken the
bottle.

But bear in mind, after all that can be said and done, _that there is
nothing in these cases like water_—there is nothing like keeping the
parts clean, and the only way of _thoroughly_ effecting this object is
_by putting him every morning_ INTO _his tub_.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not apply white lead, as it is a poison. Do not
be afraid of using _plenty_ of water, as cleanliness is one of the most
important items of the treatment.

94. _What are the causes of convulsions in an infant?_

Stuffing him, in the early months of his existence, _with food_, the
mother having plenty of breast-milk the while; the constant physicking
of a child by his own mother; teething; hooping-cough, when attacking a
very young baby.

I never knew a case of convulsions occur—say for the first four months
(except in very young infants laboring under hooping-cough)—where
children lived on the breast-milk alone, and where they were _not_
frequently quacked by their mothers!

For the treatment of the convulsions from teething, see page 61.

_What to do_ in a case of convulsions which has been caused by feeding
an infant either with too much or with _artificial_ food. Give him,
every ten minutes, a teaspoonful of ipecacuanha wine, until free
vomiting be excited, then put him into a warm bath (see Warm Baths); and
when he comes out of it administer to him a teaspoonful of castor oil,
and repeat it every four hours until the bowels be well opened.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not, for at least a month after the fit, give him
artificial food, but keep him entirely to the breast. Do not apply
leeches to the head.

_What to do in a case of convulsions from hooping-cough._—There is
nothing better than dashing cold water on the face, and immersing him in
a warm bath of 98 degrees Fahr. If he be about his teeth, and they be
plaguing him, let the gums be both freely and frequently lanced. In
convulsions from hooping-cough I have found cod-liver oil a valuable
medicine. Convulsions seldom occur in hooping-cough, unless the child be
either very young or exceedingly delicate. In either case cod-liver oil
is likely to be serviceable, as it helps to sustain and support him in
his extremity.

Convulsions attending an attack of hooping-cough make it a _serious_
complication, and requires the assiduous and skillful attention of a
judicious medical man.

_What_ NOT _to do_ in such a case.—Do not apply leeches; the babe
requires additional strength, and not to be robbed of it; and do not
attempt to treat the case yourself.

95. _What are the best remedies for the costiveness of an infant?_

I strongly object to the frequent administration of opening medicine, as
the repetition of it increases the mischief to a tenfold degree.

_What to do._—If a babe, after the first few months, were held out, and
if, at regular intervals, he were put upon his chair, costiveness would
not so much prevail. It is wonderful how soon the bowels, in the
generality of cases, by this simple plan may be brought into a regular
state.

Besides, it inducts an infant into clean habits. I know many careful
mothers who have accustomed their children, after the first three
months, to do without diapers altogether. It causes at first a little
trouble, but that trouble is amply repaid by the good consequences that
ensue; among which must be named the dispensing with such incumbrances
as diapers. Diapers frequently chafe, irritate, and gall the tender skin
of a baby. But they cannot, of course, at an early age be dispensed
with, unless a mother has great judgment, sense, tact, and perseverance,
to bring her little charge into the habit of having the bowels relieved
and the bladder emptied every time he is either held out or put upon his
chair.

Before giving an infant a particle of aperient medicine, try, if the
bowels are costive, the effect of a little _raw_ sugar and water, either
half a teaspoonful of raw sugar dissolved in a teaspoonful or two of
water, or give him, out of your fingers, half a teaspoonful of raw sugar
to eat. I mean by _raw_ sugar, not the white, but the pure and
unadulterated sugar, and which you can only procure from a respectable
grocer. If you are wise, you will defer as long as you can giving an
aperient. If you once begin, and continue it for awhile, opening
medicine becomes a dire necessity, and then woe-betide the poor
unfortunate child!

It might sometimes be necessary to give opening medicine, but the less
frequently the better. The following, when it becomes absolutely
necessary to give an aperient, are some of the best, simple, and safe
that can be administered by a mother to her baby. I give you several, as
it might be well, from time to time, to vary them: (1.) One or two
teaspoonfuls of fluid magnesia, made palatable by the addition of a
little sugar, may be chosen; or (2.) The popular remedy of syrup of
rhubarb and castor oil:

               Take of—Syrup of Rhubarb,
                        Castor Oil, of each half an ounce:

  To make a Mixture. A teaspoonful to be taken early in the morning,
  first well shaking the bottle.

It might be well again to state, that the bottle must be _violently_
shaken _just_ before administering the mixture, or the oil will not mix
with the syrup; or (3.) A teaspoonful of syrup of rhubarb, without the
admixture of the castor oil may be given early in the morning
occasionally; or (4.) A teaspoonful of equal parts, say half an ounce of
each, of fluid magnesia and of syrup of rhubarb, may be taken for a
change. Another safe and palatable aperient for an infant is (5.) Syrup
of senna, from a half to a whole teaspoonful being the dose. Castor oil
is another medicine prescribed for a baby’s costiveness, and, being a
safe one, may occasionally be used. Care should be taken to have the
castor oil freshly drawn, and of the best quality. (6.) Syrup of red
roses and castor oil (of each equal parts), being a good, elegant, and
pleasant way of giving it:

                Take of—Syrup of Red Roses,
                         Castor Oil, of each six drachms:

  To make a Mixture. A teaspoonful to be taken occasionally, first well
  shaking the bottle, and to be repeated every four hours, until the
  bowels be relieved.

(7.) An excellent remedy for the costiveness of a baby is a soap
suppository, the application of which will be found a safe, speedy, and
certain method of opening the bowels. It is made by paring a piece of
white curd-soap round; it should be of the size, in circumference, of a
cedar pencil, and it must be in length about two inches. This should be
administered by dipping it in a little warm sweet oil, and should then
be gently introduced up the bowel in the same manner as you would an
enema pipe, allowing about a quarter of an inch to remain in view. It
must then be left alone, and in a minute or two the soap suppository
will be expelled, and instantly the bowels will be comfortably and
effectually relieved. When a child is two or three years old and upwards
a dip-candle suppository is superior to a soap suppository.

If it be _absolutely_ necessary to give opening medicine, it will be
well to alternate the use of them—that is to say, to give at one time
the syrup of senna, at another the fluid magnesia sweetened, and a third
to administer the soap suppository dipped in oil, but waiting at least
two days between, the bowels being costive all the time, before
resorting to an aperient. Bear in mind, and let it make a strong
impression upon you, that the less the bowels of an infant are irritated
by opening medicine, the aperient being ever so simple and
well-selected, the better will it be for him both now and for the
future.

When the infant is five or six months old, either oatmeal milk gruel, or
Robinson’s Patent Groat Gruel made with new milk, occasionally given in
lieu of the usual food, will often open the bowels, and will thus
supersede the necessity of administering an aperient.

Castor oil, or Dr. Merriman’s Purgative Liniment, well rubbed every
morning, for ten minutes at a time, over the region of the bowels, will
frequently prevent costiveness, and thus will do away with the
need—which is a great consideration—of giving an aperient.

                Take of—Tincture of aloes, half an ounce;
                         Soap liniment, one ounce:

  Make a liniment.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—There are two preparations of mercury I wish to warn
you against administering of your own accord, viz.—(1.) Calomel, and a
milder preparation called (2.) gray powder (mercury with chalk). It is a
common practice in this country to give calomel, on account of the
readiness with which it may be administered, it being small in quantity
and nearly tasteless. Gray powder, also, is, with many mothers, a
favorite in the nursery. It is a medicine of immense power—either for
good or for evil; in certain cases it is very valuable; but in others,
and in the great majority, it is very detrimental.

This practice, then, of a mother giving mercury, whether in the form
either of calomel or of gray powder, cannot be too strongly reprobated,
as the frequent administration either of one or of the other weakens the
body, predisposes it to cold, and frequently excites king’s evil—a
disease too common in this country. Calomel and gray powder, then, ought
never to be administered unless ordered by a medical man.

Syrup of buckthorn and jalap are also frequently given, but they are
griping medicines for a baby, and ought to be banished from the nursery.

The frequent repetition of opening medicines, then, in any shape or
form, very much interferes with digestion; they must, therefore, be
given as seldom as possible.

Let me, at the risk of wearying you, again urge the importance of your
avoiding as much as possible, giving a babe purgative medicines. They
irritate beyond measure the tender bowels of an infant, and only make
him more costive afterward; they interfere with his digestion, and are
liable to give him cold. A mother who is always of her own accord
quacking her child with opening physic, is laying up for her unfortunate
offspring a debilitated constitution—a miserable existence.

96. _Are there any means of preventing the Costiveness of an infant?_

If greater care were paid to the rules of health, such as attention to
diet, exercise in the open air, thorough ablution of the _whole_
body—more especially when he is being washed—causing the water, from a
large and well-filled sponge, to stream over the lower part of his
bowels; the regular habit of causing him, at stated periods, to be held
out, whether he want or not, that he may solicit a stool. If all these
rules were observed, costiveness would not so frequently prevail, and
one of the miseries of the nursery would be done away with.

Some mothers are frequently dosing their poor unfortunate babies either
with magnesia to cool them, or with castor oil to heal the bowels! Oh,
the folly of such practices! The frequent repetition of magnesia,
instead of cooling an infant, makes him feverish and irritable. The
constant administration of castor oil, instead of healing the bowels,
wounds them beyond measure. No! it would be a blessed thing if a baby
could be brought up without giving him a particle of opening medicine;
his bowels would then act naturally and well: but then, as I have just
now remarked, a mother must be particular in attending to Nature’s
medicines—to fresh air, to exercise, to diet, to thorough ablution, etc.
Until that time comes, poor unfortunate babies must be occasionally
dosed with an aperient.

97. _What are the causes of, and remedies for, Flatulence?_

Flatulence most frequently occurs in those infants who live on
_artificial_ food, especially if they are over-fed. I therefore beg to
refer you to the precautions I have given, when speaking of the
importance of keeping a child for the first four or five months
_entirely_ to the breast; and, if that be not practicable, of the times
of feeding, and of the _best_ kinds of artificial food, and of those
which are least likely to cause “wind.”

_What to do._—Notwithstanding these precautions, if the babe should
still suffer, “One of the best and safest remedies for flatulence is
sal-volatile,—a teaspoonful of a solution of one drachm to an ounce and
a half of water.” Or, a little dill or aniseed may be added to the
food—half a teaspoonful of dill water. Or, take twelve drops of oil of
dill, and two lumps of sugar; rub them well in a mortar together; then
add, drop by drop, three tablespoonfuls of spring water; let it be
preserved in a bottle for use. A teaspoonful of this, first shaking the
vial, may be added to each quantity of food. Or, three teaspoonfuls of
bruised caraway seeds may be boiled for ten minutes in a teacupful of
water, and then strained. One or two teaspoonfuls of the caraway-tea may
be added to each quantity of his food, or a dose of rhubarb and magnesia
may be occasionally given.

Opodeldoc, or warm olive oil, well rubbed, for a quarter of an hour at a
time, by means of the warm hand, over the bowels, will frequently give
relief. Turning the child over on his bowels, so that they may press on
the nurse’s lap, will often afford great comfort. A warm bath (where he
is suffering severely) generally gives _immediate_ ease in flatulence;
it acts as a fomentation to the bowels. But after all, a dose of mild
aperient medicine, when the babe is suffering severely, is often the
best remedy for “wind.”

Remember, at all times, prevention, whenever it be—and how frequently it
is—possible, is better than cure.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—“Godfrey’s Cordial,” “Infants’ Preservative,” and
“Dalby’s Carminative” are sometimes given in flatulence; but as most of
these quack medicines contain, in one form or another, either opium or
poppy, and as opium and poppy are both dangerous remedies for children,
ALL quack medicines must be banished the nursery.

Syrup of poppies is another remedy which is often given by a nurse to
afford relief for flatulence; but let me urge upon you the importance of
banishing it from the nursery. It has (when given by unprofessional
persons) caused the untimely end of thousands of children. The medical
journals and the newspapers teem with cases of deaths from mothers
incautiously giving syrup of poppies to ease pain and to procure sleep.

98. _What are the symptoms, the causes, and the treatment of “Gripings”
of an infant?_

_The symptoms._—The child draws up his legs; screams violently; if put
to the nipple to comfort him, he turns away from it and cries bitterly;
he strains, as though he were having a stool; if he have a motion, it
will be slimy, curdled, and perhaps green. If, in addition to the above
symptoms, he pass a large quantity of watery fluid from the bowels, the
case becomes one of _watery gripes_, and requires the immediate
attention of a medical man.

The _causes_ of “gripings” or “gripes” may proceed either from the
infant or from the mother. If from the child, it is generally owing
either to improper food or to over-feeding; if from the mother, it may
be traced to her having taken either greens, or pork, or tart beer, or
sour porter, or pickles, or drastic purgatives.

_What to do._—The _treatment_, of course, must depend upon the cause. If
it arise from over-feeding, I would advise a dose of castor oil to be
given, and warm fomentations to be applied to the bowels, and the mother
or the nurse to be more careful for the future. If it proceed from
improper food, a dose or two of magnesia and rhubarb in a little dill
water, made palatable with simple syrup.

             Take of—Powdered Turkey Rhubarb, half a scruple;
                      Carbonate of Magnesia, one scruple;
                      Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                      Dill Water, eight drachms;

  Make a Mixture. One or two teaspoonfuls (according to the age of the
  child) to be taken every four hours, until relief be obtained—first
  shaking the bottle.

If it arise from a mother’s imprudence in eating trash, or from her
taking violent medicine, a warm bath: a warm bath, indeed, let the cause
of “griping” be what it may, usually affords instant relief.

Another excellent remedy is the following: Soak a piece of new flannel,
folded into two or three thicknesses, in warm water; wring it tolerably
dry, and apply as hot as the child can comfortably bear it to the
bowels, then wrap him in a warm, dry blanket, and keep him, for at least
half an hour, enveloped in it. Under the above treatment, he will
generally soon fall into a sweet sleep, and awake quite refreshed.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not give opiates, astringents, chalk, or any
quack medicine whatever.

If a child suffer from a mother’s folly in her eating improper food, it
will be cruel in the extreme for him a _second_ time to be tormented
from the same cause.

99. _What occasions Hiccough, and what is its treatment?_

Hiccough is of such a trifling nature as hardly to require interference.
It may generally be traced to over-feeding. Should it be severe, four or
five grains of calcined magnesia, with a little syrup and aniseed water,
and attention to feeding, are all that will be necessary.

100. _Will you describe the symptoms of Diarrhœa—“Looseness of the
bowels?”_

It will be well, before doing so, to tell you how many motions a young
infant ought to have a day, their color, consistence, and smell. Well,
then, he should have from three to six motions in the twenty-four hours;
the color ought to be a bright yellow, inclining to orange; the
consistence should be that of thick gruel; indeed, his motion, if
healthy, ought to be somewhat of the color (but a little more
orange-tinted) and of the consistence of mustard made for the table; it
should be nearly, if not quite, devoid of smell; it ought to have a
faint and peculiar, but not a strong disagreeable odor. If it has a
strong and disagreeable smell, the child is not well, and the case
should be investigated, more especially if there be either curds or
lumps in the motions; these latter symptoms denote that the food has not
been properly digested.

Now, suppose a child should have a slight bowel complaint—that is to
say, that he has six or eight motions during the twenty-four hours,—and
that the stools are of a thinner consistence than what I have
described,—provided, at the same time, that he is not griped, that he
has no pain, and has not lost his desire for the breast: What ought to
be done? _Nothing._ A slight looseness of the bowels should _never_ be
interfered with,—it is often an effort of nature to relieve itself of
some vitiated motion that wanted a vent—or to act as a diversion, by
relieving the irritation of the gums. Even if he be not cutting his
teeth, he may be “breeding” them, that is to say, the teeth may be
forming in his gums, and may cause almost as much irritation as though
he were actually cutting them. Hence, you see the immense good a slight
“looseness of the bowels” may cause. I think that I have now proved to
you the danger of interfering in such a case, and that I have shown you
the folly and the mischief of at once giving astringents—such as
Godfrey’s Cordial, Dalby’s Carminative, etc.—to relieve a _slight_
relaxation.

A moderate “looseness of the bowels,” then, is often a safety-valve, and
you may with as much propriety close the safety-valve of a steam engine
as stop a moderate “looseness of the bowels!”

Now, if the infant, instead of having from three to six motions, should
have more than double the latter number; if they be more watery; if they
become slimy and green, or green in part and curdled; if they should
have an unpleasant smell; if he be sick, cross, restless, fidgety, and
poorly; if every time he has a motion he be griped and in pain, we
should then say that he is laboring under diarrhœa; then, it will be
necessary to give a little medicine, which I will indicate in a
subsequent Conversation.

Should there be both blood and slime mixed with the stool, the case
becomes more serious; still with proper care, relief can generally be
quickly obtained. If the evacuations—instead of being stool—are merely
blood and slime, and the child strain frequently and violently,
endeavoring thus, but in vain, to relieve himself, crying at each
effort, the case assumes the character of dysentery. See Symptoms and
Treatment of Dysentery.

If there be a mixture of blood, slime, and stool from the bowels, the
case would be called dysenteric diarrhœa. This latter case requires
great skill and judgment on the part of a medical man, and great
attention and implicit obedience from the mother and the nurse. I merely
mention these diseases in order to warn you of their importance, and of
the necessity of strictly attending to a doctor’s orders.

101. _What are the causes of diarrhœa—“Looseness of the bowels?”_

Improper food; over-feeding; teething; cold; the mother’s milk from
various causes disagreeing, namely, from her being out of health, from
her eating unsuitable food, from her taking improper and drastic
purgatives, or from her suckling her child when she is pregnant. Of
course, if any of these causes are in operation, they ought, if
possible, to be remedied, or medicine to the babe will be of little
avail.

102. _What is the treatment of Diarrhœa?_

_What to do._—If the case be _slight_, and has lasted two or three days
(do not interfere by giving medicine at first), and if the cause, as it
probably is, be some acidity or vitiated stool that wants a vent, and
thus endeavors to obtain one by purging, the best treatment is to assist
nature by giving either a dose of castor oil or a moderate one of
rhubarb and magnesia, and thus to work off the enemy. For a rhubarb and
magnesia mixture prescription, see question 98.

After the enemy has been worked off, either by the castor oil or by the
magnesia and rhubarb, the purging will, in all probability, cease; but
if the relaxation still continue, that is to say, for three or four
days,—then, if medical advice cannot be procured, the following mixture
should be given:

         Take of—Compound Powdered Chalk with Opium, ten grains;
                  Oil of Dill, five drops;
                  Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                  Water, nine drachms;

  Make a Mixture. Half a teaspoonful to be given to an infant of six
  months and under, and one teaspoonful to a child above that age, every
  four hours—first shaking the bottle. Let the mixture be made by a
  chemist.

The baby ought, for a few days, to be kept _entirely_ to the breast. The
mother should be most particular in her own diet.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—The mother must neither take greens, nor cabbage,
nor raw fruit, nor pastry, nor beer; indeed, while the diarrhœa of her
babe continues, she had better abstain from wine, as well as from
fermented liquors. The child, if at the breast, ought _not_, while the
diarrhœa continues, to have any artificial food. He must neither be
dosed with gray powder (a favorite but highly improper remedy in these
cases), nor with any quack medicines, such as Dalby’s Carminative or
Godfrey’s Cordial.

103. _What are the symptoms of Dysentery?_

Dysentery frequently arises from a neglected diarrhœa. It is more
dangerous than diarrhœa, as it is of an inflammatory character; and as,
unfortunately, it frequently attacks a delicate child, requires skillful
handling: hence the care and experience required in treating a case of
dysentery.

Well, then, what are the symptoms? The infant, in all probability, has
had an attack of diarrhœa—bowel complaint as it is called—for several
days; he having had a dozen or two of motions, many of them slimy and
frothy, like “frog-spawn,” during the twenty-four hours. Suddenly the
character of the motion changes,—from being principally stool, it
becomes almost entirely blood and mucus; he is dreadfully griped, which
causes him to strain violently, as though his inside would come away
every time he has a motion,—screaming and twisting about, evidently
being in the greatest pain, drawing his legs up to his belly and
writhing in agony. Sickness and vomiting are always present, which still
more robs him of his little remaining strength, and prevents the repair
of his system. Now, look at his face! It is the very picture of
distress. Suppose he has been a plump, healthy little fellow, you will
see his face, in a few days, become old-looking, care-worn, haggard, and
pinched. Day and night the enemy tracks him (unless proper remedies be
administered); no sleep, or, if he sleep, he is every few minutes
roused. It is heart-rending to have to attend a bad case of dysentery in
a child,—the writhing, the screaming, the frequent vomiting, the pitiful
look, the rapid wasting and exhaustion, make it more distressing to
witness than almost any other disease a doctor attends.

104. _Can anything be done to relieve such a case?_

Yes. A judicious medical man will do a great deal. But, suppose that you
are not able to procure one, I will tell you _what to do_ and _what_ NOT
_to do_.

_What to do._—If the child be at the breast, keep him to it, and let him
have nothing else, for dysentery is frequently caused by improper
feeding. If your milk be not good, or it be scanty, _instantly_ procure
a healthy wet-nurse. _Lose not a moment_; for in dysentery moments are
precious. But, suppose that you have no milk, and that no wet-nurse can
be procured: what then? Feed him entirely on cow’s milk—the milk of
_one_ healthy cow; let the milk be unboiled, and be fresh from the cow.
Give it in small quantities at a time, and frequently, so that it may be
retained on the stomach. If a tablespoonful of the milk make him sick,
give him a dessertspoonful; if a dessertspoonful cause sickness, let him
only have a teaspoonful at a time, and let it be repeated every quarter
of an hour. But remember, in such a case the breast-milk—the breast-milk
alone—is incomparably superior to any other milk or to any other food
whatever.

If he be a year old and weaned, then feed him, as above recommended, on
the cow’s milk. If there be extreme exhaustion and debility, let fifteen
drops of brandy be added to each tablespoonful of new milk, and let it
be given every half hour.

Now with regard to medicine. I approach this part of the treatment with
some degree of reluctance—for dysentery is a case requiring opium, and
opium I never like a mother of her own accord to administer. But suppose
a medical man cannot be procured in time, the mother must then prescribe
or the child will die! _What then is to be done?_ Sir Charles Locock
considers “that in severe dysentery, especially where there is sickness,
there is no remedy equal to pure calomel, in a full dose, without
opium.” Therefore, at the very _onset_ of the disease, let from three to
five grains (according to the age of the patient) of calomel, mixed with
an equal quantity of powdered white sugar, be put dry on the tongue. In
three hours after let the following mixture be administered:

            Take of—Compound Ipecacuanha Powder, five grains;
                     Ipecacuanha Wine, half a drachm;
                     Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                     Cinnamon Water, nine drachms:

  To make a Mixture. A teaspoonful to be given every three or four
  hours, first _well_ shaking the bottle. Let this mixture, or any other
  medicine I may prescribe, be always made by a respectable chemist.

Supposing he cannot retain the mixture—the stomach rejecting it as soon
as swallowed—what then? Give the opium, mixed with small doses of
mercury with chalk and sugar, in the form of powder, and put one of the
powders _dry_ on the tongue every three hours:

               Take of—Powdered Opium, half a grain;
                        Mercury with Chalk, nine grains;
                        Sugar of Milk, twenty-four grains:

  Mix well in a mortar, and divide into twelve powders.

Now, suppose the dysentery has for several days persisted, and that,
during that time, nothing but mucus and blood—that no real stool—has
come from the bowels, then a combination of castor oil and opium ought,
instead of the medicine recommended above, to be given. My friend, the
late Dr. Baly, who had made dysentery his particular study, considered
the combination of opium and castor oil very valuable in dysentery.

           Take of—Mixture of Acacia, three drachms;
                    Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                    Tincture of Opium, ten drops (not minims);
                    Castor oil, two drachms;
                    Cinnamon Water, four drachms:

  Make a Mixture. A teaspoonful to be taken every four hours, first
  _well_ shaking the bottle.

A warm bath, at the commencement of the disease, is very efficacious;
but it must be given at the _commencement_. If he has had dysentery for
a day or two, he will be too weak to have a warm bath; then, instead of
the bath, try the following: Wrap him in a blanket which has been
previously wrung out of hot water, over which envelop him in a _dry_
blanket. Keep him in this hot, damp blanket for half an hour; then take
him out, put on his night-gown and place him in bed, which has been, if
it be winter time, previously warmed. The above “blanket treatment” will
frequently give great relief, and will sometimes cause him to fall into
a sweet sleep. A flannel bag filled with hot powdered table salt, made
hot in the oven, applied to the bowels, will afford much comfort.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not give aperients, unless it be, as before
advised, the castor oil guarded with the opium; do not stuff him with
artificial food; do not fail to send for a judicious and an experienced
medical man; for, remember, it requires a skillful doctor to treat a
case of dysentery, more especially in a child.

105. _What are the symptoms, the causes, and the treatment of
Nettle-rash?_

Nettle-rash consists of several irregular raised wheals, red at the base
and white on the summit, on different parts of the body; _but it seldom
attacks the face_. It is not contagious, and it may occur at all ages
and many times. It comes and goes, remaining only a short time in a
place. It puts on very much the appearance of the child having been
stung by nettles—hence its name. It produces great heat, itching, and
irritation, sometimes to such a degree as to make him feverish, sick,
and fretful. He is generally worse when he is warm in bed, or when the
surface of his body is suddenly exposed to the air. Rubbing the skin,
too, always aggravates the itching and the tingling, and brings out a
fresh crop.

The _cause_ of nettle-rash may commonly be traced to improper feeding;
although, occasionally, it proceeds from teething.

_What to do._—It is a complaint of no danger, and readily gives way to a
mild aperient, and to attention to diet. There is nothing better to
relieve the irritation of the skin than a warm bath. If it be a severe
attack of nettle-rash, by all means call in a medical man.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not apply cold applications to his skin, and do
not wash him (while the rash is out) in quite _cold_ water. Do not allow
him to be in a draught, but let him be in a well-ventilated room. If he
be old enough to eat meat, keep it from him for a few days, and let him
live on milk and farinaceous diet. Avoid strong purgatives, and calomel,
and gray powder.

106. _What are the symptoms and the treatment of Red-gum?_

Red-gum, tooth-rash, red-gown, is usually owing to irritation from
teething; not always from the cutting, but from the evolution, the
“breeding,” of the teeth. It is also sometimes owing to unhealthy stools
irritating the bowels, and showing itself, by sympathy, on the skin.
Red-gum consists of several small papulæ, or pimples, about the size of
pins’ heads, and may be known from measles—the only disease for which it
is at all likely to be mistaken—by its being unattended by symptoms of
cold, such as sneezing, running, and redness of the eyes, etc., and by
the patches _not_ assuming a crescentic, half-moon shape; red-gum, in
short, may readily be known by the child’s health being unaffected,
unless, indeed, there be a great crop of pimples; then there will be
slight feverishness.

_What to do._—Little need be done. If there be a good deal of
irritation, a mild aperient should be given. The child ought to be kept
moderately but not very warm.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Draughts of air, or cold, should be carefully
avoided; as, by sending the eruption suddenly in, either convulsions or
disordered bowels might be produced. Do not dose him with gray powder.

107. _How would you prevent “Stuffing of the nose” in a new-born babe?_

Rubbing a little tallow on the bridge of the nose is the old-fashioned
remedy, and answers the purpose. It ought to be applied every evening
just before putting him to bed.

If the “stuffing” be severe, dip a sponge in hot water, as hot as he can
comfortably bear; ascertain that it be not too hot, by previously
applying it to your own face, and then put it for a few minutes to the
bridge of his nose. As soon as the hard mucus is within reach, it should
be carefully removed.

108. _Do you consider sickness injurious to an infant?_

Many thriving babies are, after taking the breast, frequently sick;
still we cannot look upon sickness otherwise than as an index of either
a disordered or of an overloaded stomach. If the child be sick, and yet
be thriving, it is a proof that he overloads his stomach. A mother,
then, must not allow him to suck so much at a time. She should, until he
retains all he takes, lessen the quantity of milk. If he be sick and
does _not_ thrive, the mother should notice if the milk he throws up has
a sour smell; if it has, she must first of all look to her own health;
she ought to ascertain if her own stomach be out of order; for if such
be the case, it is impossible for her to make good milk. She should
observe whether, in the morning, her own tongue be furred and dry;
whether she have a disagreeable taste in her mouth, or pains at her
stomach, or heart-burn, or flatulence. If she have all, or any of these
symptoms, the mystery is explained why he is sick and does not thrive.
She ought then to seek advice, and a medical man will soon put her
stomach into good order; and, by so doing, will, at the same time,
benefit the child.

But if the mother be in the enjoyment of good health, she must then look
to the babe herself, and ascertain if he be cutting his teeth; if the
gums require lancing; if the secretions from the bowels be proper both
in quantity and in quality; and, if he have had _artificial_ food—it
being absolutely necessary to give such food—whether it agree with him.

_What to do._—In the first place, if the gums are red, hot, and swollen,
let them be lanced; in the second, if the secretions from the bowels are
either unhealthy or scanty, give him a dose of aperient medicine, such
as castor oil, or the following: Take two or three grains of powdered
Turkey rhubarb, three grains of pure carbonate of magnesia, and one
grain of aromatic powder. Mix. The powder to be taken at bedtime, mixed
in a teaspoonful of sugar and water, and which should, if necessary, be
repeated the following night. In the third place, if the food he be
taking does not agree with him, change it (_vide_ answer to question
33). Give it in smaller quantities at a time, and not so frequently; or,
what will be better still, if it be possible, keep him, for awhile,
entirely to the breast.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not let him overload his stomach either with
breast-milk or _with artificial food_. Let the mother avoid, until his
sickness be relieved, greens, cabbage, and all other green vegetables.

109. _What are the causes, the symptoms, the prevention, and the cure of
Thrush?_

The thrush is a frequent disease of an infant, and is often brought on
either by stuffing him or by giving him improper food. A child brought
up _entirely_, for the first three or four months, on the breast, seldom
suffers from this complaint. The thrush consists of several irregular,
roundish, white specks on the lips, the tongue, the inside and the
angles of the mouth, giving the parts affected the appearance of curds
and whey having been smeared upon them. The mouth is hot and painful,
and he is afraid to suck: the moment the nipple is put into his mouth he
begins to cry. The thrush sometimes, although but rarely, runs through
the whole of the alimentary canal. It should be borne in mind that
nearly every child who is sucking has his or her tongue white or
“frosted” as it is sometimes called. The thrush may be mild or very
severe.

Now with regard to _What to do_.—As the thrush is generally owing to
improper and to artificial feeding, _if the child be at the breast_,
keep him, for a time entirely to it. Do not let him be always sucking,
as that will not only fret his mouth, but will likewise irritate and
make sore the mother’s nipple.

_If he be not at the breast_, but has been weaned, then keep him for a
few days entirely to a milk diet—to the milk of ONE cow—either boiled,
if it be hot weather, to keep it sweet; or unboiled, in cool
weather—fresh as it comes from the cow.

The best medicine is the old-fashioned one of borax, a combination of
powdered lump sugar and borax being a good one for the purpose: the
powdered lump sugar increases the efficacy and the cleansing properties
of the borax; it tends, moreover, to make it more palatable:

                 Take of—Biborate of Soda, half a drachm;
                          Lump-sugar, two scruples:

  To be well mixed together, and made into twelve powders. One of the
  powders to be put dry on the tongue every four hours.

The best _local_ remedy is honey of borax, which ought to be smeared
frequently, by means of the finger, on the parts affected.

Thorough ventilation of the apartment must be observed; and great
cleanliness of the vessels containing the milk should be insisted upon.

In a bad case of thrush, change of air to the country is most desirable;
the effect is sometimes, in such cases, truly magical.

If the thrush be brought on either by too much or by improper food, in
the first case, of course, a mother must lessen the quantity; and, in
the second, she should be more careful in her selection.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not use either a calf’s teat or wash-leather for
the feeding-bottle; fortunately, since the invention of india-rubber
teats, they are now nearly exploded; they were, in olden times, fruitful
causes of thrush. Do not mind the trouble of ascertaining that the
cooking-vessels connected with the baby’s food are perfectly clean and
sweet. Do not leave the purity and the goodness of the cow’s milk (it
being absolutely necessary to feed him on artificial food) to be judged
either by the milkman or by the nurse, but taste and prove it yourself.
Do not keep the milk in a warm place, but either in the dairy or in the
cellar; and, if it be summer time, let the jug holding the milk be put
in a crock containing lumps of ice. Do not use milk that has been milked
longer than twelve hours, but, if practicable, have it milked direct
from the cow, and use it _immediately_—let it be really and truly fresh
and genuine milk.

When the disease is _severe_, it may require more active treatment—such
as a dose of calomel; _which medicine must never be given, unless it be
either under the direction of a medical man, or unless it be in an
extreme case,—such as dysentery_; therefore, the mother had better seek
advice. See the Treatment of Dysentery.

In a _severe_ case of thrush, where the complaint has been brought on by
_artificial_ feeding—the babe not having the advantage of the mother’s
milk—it is really surprising how rapidly a wet-nurse—if the case has not
been too long deferred—will effect a cure, where all other means have
been tried and have failed. The effect has been truly magical! In a
severe case of thrush, pure air and thorough ventilation are essential
to recovery.

110. _Is anything to be learned from the cry of an infant?_

There is a language in the cry of an infant which a thoughtful medical
man can well interpret. The cry of hunger, for instance, is very
characteristic,—it is unaccompanied with tears, and is a wailing cry;
the cry of teething is a fretful cry; the cry of earache is short,
sharp, piercing, and decisive, the head being moved about from side to
side, and the little hand being often put up to the affected side of the
head; the cry of bowel-ache is also expressive,—the cry is not so
piercing as from earache, and is an interrupted, straining cry,
accompanied with a drawing up of the legs to the belly; the cry of
bronchitis is a gruff and phlegmatic cry; the cry of inflammation of the
lungs is more a moan than a cry; the cry of croup is hoarse, and rough,
and ringing, and is so characteristic that it may truly be called “the
croupy cry,” moreover, he breathes as though he breathed through muslin;
the cry of inflammation of the membranes of the brain is a piercing
shriek—a danger signal—most painful to hear; the cry of a child
recovering from a severe illness is a cross, and wayward, and tearful
cry; he may truly be said to be in a quarrelsome mood; he bursts out
without rhyme or reason into a passionate flood of tears; tears are
always, in a severe illness, to be looked upon as a good omen, as a sign
of amendment: tears, when a child is dangerously ill, are rarely if ever
seen; a cry at night, for light—a frequent cause of a babe crying—is a
restless cry:

                     “An infant crying in the night:
                     An infant crying for the light:
                   And with no language but a cry.”

111. _If an infant be delicate, have you any objection to his having
either veal or mutton broth to strengthen him?_

Broths seldom agree with a babe at the breast. I have known them to
produce sickness, disorder the bowels, and create fever. I recommend
you, therefore, not to make the attempt.

Although broth and beef-tea, when taken by the mouth, will seldom agree
with an infant at the breast, yet, when used as an enema, and in small
quantities, so that they may be retained, I have frequently found them
to be of great benefit: they have, in some instances, appeared to have
snatched delicate children from the brink of the grave.

112. _My babe’s ankles are very weak: what do you advise to strengthen
them?_

If his ankles be weak, let them every morning be bathed, after the
completion of his morning’s ablution, for five minutes each time, with
bay salt and water, a small handful of bay salt dissolved in a quart of
rain water (with the chill of the water taken off in the winter, and of
its proper temperature in the summer time); then let them be dried;
after the drying, let the ankles be well rubbed with the following
liniment:

             Take of—Oil of Rosemary, three drachms;
                      Liniment of Camphor, thirteen drachms:

  To make a Liniment.

Do not let him be put on his feet early; but allow him to crawl, and
sprawl, and kick about the floor, until his ankles become strong.

Do not, on any account, without having competent advice on the subject,
use iron instruments or mechanical supports of any kind: the ankles are
generally, by such artificial supports, made worse, in consequence of
the pressure causing a further dwindling away and enfeebling of the
ligaments of the ankles, already wasted and weakened.

Let him wear shoes, with straps over the insteps to keep them on, and
not boots: boots will only, by wasting the ligaments, increase the
weakness of the ankles.

113. _Sometimes there is a difficulty in restraining the bleeding of
leech-bites. What is the best method?_

The difficulty in these cases generally arises from the improper method
of performing it. For example—a mother endeavors to stop the hemorrhage
by loading the part with rag; the more the bites discharge, the more rag
she applies. At the same time, the child probably is in a room with a
large fire, with two or three candles, with the doors closed, and with
perhaps a dozen people in the apartment, whom the mother has, in her
fright, sent for. This practice is strongly reprehensible.

If the bleeding cannot be stopped,—in the first place, the fire must be
extinguished, the door and windows should be thrown open, and the room
ought to be cleared of persons, with the exception of one, or, at the
most, two; and every rag should be removed. “Stopping of
leech-bites.—The simplest and most certain way, till the proper
assistance is obtained, is the pressure of the finger, with nothing
intervening. It _cannot_ bleed through that.” [Sir Charles Locock, in a
_Letter_ to the Author.]

Many babies have lost their lives by excessive loss of blood from
leech-bites, from a mother not knowing how to act, and also from the
medical man either living at a distance, or not being at hand.
Fortunately for the infantile community, leeches are now very seldom
ordered by doctors.

114. _Supposing a baby to be poorly, have you any advice to give to his
mother as to her own management?_

She must endeavor to calm her feelings, or her milk will be disordered,
and she will thus materially increase his illness. If he be laboring
under any inflammatory disorder, she ought to refrain from the taking of
beer, wine, and spirits, and from all stimulating food; otherwise, she
will feed his disease.

Before concluding the first part of my subject—the Management of
Infancy—let me again urge upon you the importance—the paramount
importance—if you wish your babe to be strong and hearty,—of giving him
as little opening physic as possible. The best physic for him is
Nature’s physic—fresh air and exercise and simplicity of living. A
mother who is herself always drugging her child, can only do good to two
persons—the doctor and the druggist!

If an infant from his birth be properly managed,—if he has an abundance
of fresh air for his lungs,—if he has plenty of exercise for his muscles
(by allowing him to kick and sprawl on the floor),—if he has a good
swilling and sousing of water for his skin,—if, during the _early_
months of his life, he has nothing but the mother’s milk for his
stomach,—he will require very little medicine—the less the better! He
does not want his stomach to be made into a doctor’s shop! The grand
thing is not to take every opportunity of administering physic, but of
using every means of withholding it! And if physic be necessary, not to
doctor him yourself, unless it be in extreme and urgent cases (which in
preceding and succeeding Conversations I either have or will indicate),
but to employ an experienced medical man. A babe who is always, without
rhyme or reason, being physicked, is sure to be puny, delicate, and
unhealthy, and is ready, at any moment, to drop into an untimely grave!




                     CONCLUDING REMARKS ON INFANCY.


115. In concluding the first part of our subject—Infancy—I beg to
remark. There are four things essentially necessary to an infant’s
well-doing, namely, (1) plenty of water for the skin; (2) plenty of milk
for the stomach; (3) plenty of fresh air for the lungs; (4) plenty of
sleep for the brain: these are the four grand essentials for a babe;
without an abundance of each and all of them, perfect health is utterly
impossible!




                               CHILDHOOD.


        _Household treasures! household treasures!
          Are they jewels rich and rare;
        Or gems of rarest workmanship;
          Or gold and silver ware?
        Ask the mother as she gazes
          On her little ones at play:
        Household treasures! household treasures!
          Happy children—ye are they._
                                                J. E. CARPENTER.




                               ABLUTION.


116. _At twelve months old, do you still recommend a child to be_ PUT IN
HIS TUB _to be washed_?

Certainly I do, as I have previously recommended at page 19, in order
that his skin may be well and thoroughly cleansed. If it be summer time,
the water should be used cold; if it be winter, a dash of warm must be
added, so that it may be of the temperature of new milk; but do not, on
any account, use _very warm_ water. The head must be washed (but not
dried) before he be placed in his tub; then, putting him in the tub
containing the necessary quantity of water, and washing him as
previously recommended (See Infancy—Ablution), a large sponge should be
filled with the water and squeezed over the head, so that the water may
stream over the whole surface of the body. A jugful of cold water
should, just before taking him out of his bath, be poured over and down
his loins; all this ought rapidly to be done, and he must be quickly
dried with soft towels, and then expeditiously dressed. For the washing
of your child I would recommend you to use Castile soap in preference to
any other: it is more pure, and less irritating, and hence does not
injure the texture of the skin. Take care that the soap does not get
into his eyes, or it might produce irritation and smarting.

117. _Some mothers object to a child’s_ STANDING _in the water_.

If the head be wetted before he be placed in the tub, and if he be
washed as above directed, there can be no valid objection to it. He must
not be allowed to remain in the tub more than five minutes.

118. _Does not washing the child’s head, every morning, make him more
liable to catch cold, and does it not tend to weaken his sight?_

It does neither the one nor the other; on the contrary, it prevents
cold, and strengthens the sight; it cleanses the scalp, prevents scurf,
and, by that means, causes a more beautiful head of hair. The head,
after each washing, ought to be well brushed with a soft brush, but
should not be combed. The brushing causes a healthy circulation of the
scalp.

119. _If the head, notwithstanding the washing, be scurfy, what should
be done?_

After the head has been well dried, let a little cocoanut oil be well
rubbed, for five minutes each time, into the roots of the hair, and,
afterward, let the head be well brushed, but not combed. The fine-tooth
comb will cause a greater accumulation of scurf, and will scratch and
injure the scalp.

120. _Do you recommend a child to be washed_ IN HIS TUB _every night and
morning_?

No; once a day is quite sufficient; in the morning in preference to the
evening; unless he be poorly, then, evening instead of morning; as,
immediately after he has been washed and dried, he can be put to bed.

121. _Ought a child to be placed in his tub while he is in a state of
perspiration?_

Not while he is perspiring _violently_, or the perspiration might be
checked suddenly, and ill consequences would ensue; _nor ought he to be
put in his tub when he is cold_, or his blood would be chilled, and
would be sent from the skin to some internal vital part, and thus would
be likely to light up inflammation—probably of the lungs. His skin, when
he is placed in his bath, ought to be moderately and comfortably warm;
neither too hot nor too cold.

122. _When the child is a year old, do you recommend cold or warm water
to be used?_

If it be winter, a little warm water ought to be added, so as to raise
the temperature to that of new milk. As the summer advances, less and
less warm water is required, so that, at length, none is needed.

123. _If a child be delicate, do you recommend anything to be added to
the water which may tend to brace and strengthen him?_

Either a handful of table salt or half a handful of bay salt should be
previously dissolved in a quart jug of _cold_ water; then, just before
taking the child out of his morning bath, let the above be poured over
and down the back and loins of the child—holding the jug, while pouring
its contents on the back, twelve inches from the child, in order that it
might act as a kind of douche bath.

124. _Do you recommend the child, after he has been dried with the
towel, to be rubbed with the hand?_

I do; as friction encourages the cutaneous circulation, and causes the
skin to perform its functions properly, thus preventing the perspiration
(which is one of the impurities of the body) from being sent inwardly
either to the lungs or to other parts. The back, the chest, the bowels,
and the limbs are the parts that ought to be well rubbed.




                               CLOTHING.


125. _Have you any remarks to make on the clothing of a child?_

Children—boys and girls—especially if they be delicate, ought always to
wear high dresses up to their necks. The exposure of the upper part of
the chest (if the child be weakly) is dangerous. It is in the _upper_
part of the lungs, in the region of the collar-bones, that consumption
first shows itself. The clothing of a child, more especially about the
chest, should be large and full in every part, and be free from tight
strings, so that the circulation of the blood may not be impeded, and
that there may be plenty of room for the full development of the rapidly
growing body.

His frock or tunic ought to be of woolen material—warm, light, and
porous, in order that the perspiration may rapidly evaporate. The
practice of some mothers in allowing their children to wear tight bands
round their waists, and tight clothes, is truly reprehensible.

_Tight_ bands or _tight_ belts around the waist of a child are very
injurious to health; they crib in the chest, and thus interfere with the
rising and the falling of the ribs—so essential to breathing. _Tight_
hats ought never to be worn; by interfering with the circulation they
cause headaches. Nature delights in freedom, and resents interference!

126. _What parts of the body in particular ought to be kept warm?_

The chest, the bowels, and the feet should be kept comfortably warm. We
must guard against an opposite extreme, and not keep them too hot. The
head alone should be kept cool, on which account I do not approve either
of night or of day caps.

127. _What are the best kinds of hat for a child?_

The best covering for the head, when he is out and about, is a
loose-fitting straw hat, which will allow the perspiration to escape. It
should have a broad brim, to screen the eyes. A sunshade, that is to
say, a sea-side hat—a hat made of cotton, with a wide brim to keep off
the sun—is also an excellent hat for a child; it is very light, and
allows a free escape of the perspiration. It can be bought, ready made,
at a baby-linen warehouse.

A knitted or crocheted woolen hat, with woolen rosettes to keep the ears
warm, and which may be procured at any baby-linen warehouse, makes a
nice and comfortable winter’s hat for a child. It is also a good hat for
him to wear while performing a long journey. The color chosen is
generally scarlet and white, which, in cold weather, gives it a warm and
comfortable appearance.

It is an abominable practice to cover a child’s head either with beaver
or with felt, or with any thick, impervious material. It is a
well-ascertained fact, that both beaver and silk hats cause men to
suffer from headache, and to lose their hair—the reason being that the
perspiration cannot possibly escape through them. Now, if the
perspiration cannot escape, dangerous, or at all events injurious,
consequences must ensue, as it is well known that the skin is a
breathing apparatus, and that it will not with impunity bear
interference.

Neither a child nor any one else should be permitted to be in the glare
of the sun without his hat. If he be allowed, he is likely to have a
sun-stroke, which might either at once kill him, or might make him an
idiot for the remainder of his life, which latter would be the worse
alternative of the two.

128. _Have you any remarks to make on keeping a child’s hands and legs
warm when, in the winter time, he is carried out?_

When a child either walks or is carried out in wintry weather, be sure
and see that both his hands and legs are well protected from the cold.
There is nothing for this purpose like woolen gloves, and woolen
stockings coming up over the knees.

129. _Do you approve of a child wearing a flannel night-gown?_

He frequently throws the clothes off him, and has occasion to be taken
up in the night, and if he has not a flannel gown on is likely to catch
cold; on which account I recommend it to be worn. The usual calico
night-gown should be worn _under_ it.

130. _Do you advise a child to be_ LIGHTLY _clad, in order that he may
be hardened thereby_?

I should fear that such a plan, instead of hardening, would be likely to
produce a contrary effect. It is an ascertained fact that more children
of the poor, who are thus lightly clad, die, than of those who are
properly defended from the cold. Again, what holds good with a young
plant is equally applicable to a young child; and we all know that it is
ridiculous to think of unnecessarily exposing a tender plant to harden
it. If it were thus exposed, it would wither and die!

131. _If a child be delicate, if he has a cold body or a languid
circulation, or if he be predisposed to inflammation of the lungs, do
you approve of his wearing flannel instead of linen shirts?_

I do; as flannel tends to keep the body at an equal temperature, thus
obviating the effects of the sudden changes of the weather, and
promotes, by gentle friction, the cutaneous circulation, thus warming
the cold body, and giving an impetus to the languid circulation, and
preventing an undue quantity of blood from being sent to the lungs,
either to light up or to feed inflammation. _Fine_ flannel, of course,
ought to be worn, which should be changed as frequently as the usual
shirts.

If a child has had an attack either of bronchitis or of inflammation of
the lungs, or if he has just recovered from scarlet fever, by all means,
if he has not previously worn flannel, _instantly_ let him begin to do
so, and let him, _next_ to the skin, wear a flannel waistcoat. _This is
important advice, and ought not to be disregarded._

_Scarlet_ flannel is now much used instead of _white_ flannel; and as
scarlet flannel has a more comfortable appearance, and does not shrink
so much in washing, it may for the white be substituted.

132. _Have you any remarks to make on the shoes and stockings of a
child? and on the right way of cutting the toe-nails?_

He ought, during the winter, to wear lambs’ wool stockings that will
reach _above_ the knees, and _thick_ calico drawers that will reach a
few inches _below_ the knees; as it is of the utmost importance to keep
the lower extremities comfortably warm. It is really painful to see how
many mothers expose the bare legs of their little ones to the frosty
air, even in the depths of winter. “Tender little children are exposed
to the bitterest weather, with their legs bared in a manner that would
inevitably injure the health of strong adults.”

Garters ought not to be worn, as they impede the circulation, waste the
muscles, and interfere with walking. The stocking may be secured in its
place by means of a loop and tape, which should be fastened to a part of
the dress.

Let me urge upon you the importance of not allowing your child to wear
_tight_ shoes; they cripple the feet, causing the joints of the toes,
which ought to have free play, and which should assist in walking, to
be, in a manner, useless; they produce corns and bunions, and interfere
with the proper circulation of the foot. A shoe ought to be made
according to the shape of the foot—rights and lefts are therefore
desirable. The toe-part of the shoe must be made broad, so as to allow
plenty of room for the toes to expand, and that one toe cannot overlap
another. Be sure, then, that there be no pinching and no pressure. In
the article of shoes you ought to be particular and liberal; pay
attention to having nicely fitting ones, and let them be made of soft
leather, and throw them on one side the moment they are too small. It is
poor economy, indeed, because a pair of shoes be not worn out, to run
the risk of incurring the above evil consequences.

_Shoes are far preferable to boots_; boots weaken instead of strengthen
the ankle. The ankle and instep require free play, and ought not to be
hampered by boots. Moreover, boots, by undue pressure, decidedly waste
away the ligaments of the ankle. Boots act on the ankles in a similar
way that stays do on the waist—they do mischief by pressure. Boots waste
away the ligaments of the ankle; stays waste away the muscles of the
back and chest: and thus, in both cases, do irreparable mischief.

A shoe for a child ought to be made with a narrow strap over the instep,
and with button and button-hole: if it be not made in this way, the shoe
will not keep on the foot.

It is a grievous state of things that in this nineteenth century there
are very few shoemakers in England who know how to make a shoe! The shoe
is made not to fit the real foot, but a fashionable imaginary one!

Let me strongly urge you to be particular that the sock or stocking fits
nicely—that it is neither too small nor too large; if it be too small,
it binds up the toes unmercifully, and makes one toe to ride over the
other, and thus renders the toes perfectly useless in walking; if it be
too large, it is necessary to lap a portion of the sock or stocking
either under or over the toes, which thus presses unduly upon them, and
gives pain and annoyance. It should be borne in mind that if the toes
have full play, they, as it were, grasp the ground, and greatly assist
in locomotion—which, of course, if they are cramped up, they cannot
possibly do. Be careful, too, that the toe-part of the sock or stocking
be not pointed; let it be made square, in order to give room to the
toes. “At this helpless period of life the delicately feeble,
outspreading toes, are wedged into a narrow-toed stocking, often so
short as to double in the toes, diminishing the length of the
rapidly-growing foot! It is next, perhaps, tightly laced into a boot of
less interior dimensions than itself; when the poor little creature is
left to sprawl about with a limping, stumping gait, thus learning to
walk as it best can, under circumstances the most cruel and torturing
imaginable.”

It is impossible for either a stocking or a shoe to fit nicely, unless
the toe-nails be kept in proper order. Now, in cutting the toe-nails
there is, as in everything else, a right and a wrong way. The _right_
way of cutting a toe-nail is to cut it straight—in a straight line. The
_wrong_ way is to cut the corners of the nail—to round the nail, as it
is called. This cutting the corners of the nails often makes work for
the surgeon, as I myself can testify; it frequently produces
“growing-in” of the nail, which sometimes necessitates the removal of
either the nail or of a portion of it.

133. _At what time of the year should a child leave off his winter
clothing?_

A mother ought not to leave off her children’s winter clothing until the
spring be far advanced; it is far better to be on the safe side, and to
allow the winter clothes to be worn until the end of May. The old adage
is very good, and should be borne in mind:

                           “Button to chin
                           Till May be in;
                           Ne’er cast a clout
                           Till May be out.”

134. _Have you any general remarks to make on the present fashion of
dressing children?_

The present fashion is absurd. Children are frequently dressed like
mountebanks, with feathers and furbelows and finery: the boys go
bare-legged; the little girls are dressed like women, with their
stuck-out petticoats, crinolines, and low dresses! Their poor little
waists are drawn in tight, so that they can scarcely breathe; their
dresses are very low and short, the consequence is, that a great part of
the chest is exposed to our variable climate; their legs are bare down
to their thin socks, or, if they be clothed, they are only covered with
gossamer drawers; while their feet are incased in tight shoes of paper
thickness! Dress! dress! dress! is made with them at a tender age, and,
when first impressions are the strongest, a most important
consideration. They are thus rendered vain and frivolous, and are taught
to consider dress “as the one thing needful.” And if they live to be
women—which the present fashion is likely frequently to prevent—what are
they? Silly, simpering, delicate, lackadaisical nonentities,—dress being
their amusement, their occupation, their conversation, their everything,
their thoughts by day and their dreams by night! Let children be dressed
as children, not as men and women. Let them be taught that dress is
quite a secondary consideration. Let health, and not fashion, be the
first, and we shall have, with God’s blessing, blooming children, who
will, in time, be the pride and strength of dear old England! Oh that
the time may come, and may not be far distant, “That our sons may grow
up as the young plants, and that our daughters may be as the polished
corners of the temple.”




                                 DIET.


135. _At_ TWELVE _months old, have you any objection to a child having
any other food besides that you mentioned in answer to the 34th
question_?

There is no objection to his _occasionally_ having for dinner either a
mealy, _mashed_ potato and gravy, or a few crumbs of bread and gravy.
Rice-pudding or batter-pudding may, for a change, be given; but
remember, the food recommended in a former Conversation is what, until
he be eighteen months old, must be principally taken. During the early
months of infancy—say, for the first six or seven—if artificial food be
given at all, it should be administered by means of a feeding-bottle.
After that time, either a spoon or a nursing-boat will be preferable. As
he becomes older, the food ought to be made more solid.

136. _At_ EIGHTEEN _months old, have you any objection to a child having
meat_?

He ought not to have meat until he has several teeth to chew it with. If
he has most of his teeth—which he very likely, at this age, will
have—there is no objection to his taking a small slice either of mutton
or occasionally of roast beef, which should be well cut into very small
pieces, and mixed with a mealy, _mashed_ potato, and a few crumbs of
bread and gravy, either _every_ day, if he be delicate, or every _other_
day, if he be a gross or a fast-feeding child. It may be well, in the
generality of cases, for the first few months to give him meat _every
other_ day, and either potato and gravy, or rice or suet-pudding or
batter pudding on the alternate days; indeed, I think so highly of rice,
of suet, and of batter puddings, and of other farinaceous puddings, that
I should advise you to let him have either the one or the other, even on
those days that he has meat—giving it him _after_ his meat. But
remember, if he have meat _and_ pudding, the meat ought to be given
sparingly. If he be gorged with food, it makes him irritable, cross, and
stupid; at one time, clogging up the bowels and producing constipation;
at another, disordering the liver, and causing either clay-colored
stools, denoting a _deficiency_ of bile, or dark and offensive motions,
telling of _vitiated_ bile; while, in a third case, cramming him with
food might bring on convulsions.

137. _As you are so partial to puddings for a child, which do you
consider the best for him?_

He ought, every day, to have a pudding for his dinner—either rice,
arrow-root, sago, tapioca, suet-pudding, batter-pudding, or
Yorkshire-pudding, mixed with crumbs of bread and gravy—free from
grease. A well-boiled suet-pudding, with plenty of suet in it, is one of
the best puddings he can have; it is, in point of fact, meat and
farinaceous food combined, and is equal to and will oftentimes prevent
the giving of cod-liver oil. Before cod-liver oil came into vogue, suet
boiled in milk was _the_ remedy for a delicate child; he may,
occasionally, have fruit-pudding, provided the pastry be both plain and
light.

The objection to fruit pies and puddings is, that the pastry is often
too rich for the delicate stomach of a child: there is no objection,
certainly not, to the fruit—cooked fruit being, for a child, most
wholesome; if, therefore, fruit puddings, and pies be eaten, the pastry
part ought to be quite plain. There is, in “Murray’s Modern Cookery
Book,” an excellent suggestion, which I will take the liberty of
quoting, and of strongly urging my fair reader to carry into practice:
“_To prepare fruit for children, a far more wholesome way than in pies
and puddings_, is to put apples sliced, or plums, currants,
gooseberries, etc., into a stone jar, and sprinkle among them as much
Lisbon sugar as necessary. Set the jar on an oven or on a hearth, with a
teacupful of water to prevent the fruit from burning; or put the jar
into a saucepan of water, till its contents be perfectly done. Slices of
bread or some rice may be put into the jar, to eat with the fruit.”

_Jam_—such as strawberry, raspberry, gooseberry—_is most wholesome for a
child_, and ought occasionally to be given, in lieu of sugar, with the
rice, with the batter, and with the other puddings. Marmalade, too, is
very wholesome.

Puddings ought to be given _after_ and not _before_ his meat and
vegetables; if you give him pudding before his meat, he might refuse to
eat meat altogether.

By adopting the plan of giving puddings _every_ day, your child will
require _less_ animal food: _much_ meat is injurious to a young child.

But do not run into an opposite extreme: a _little_ meat ought, every
day, to be given, _provided he has cut the whole of his first set of
teeth_; until then, meat every _other_ day will be often enough.

138. _As soon as a child has cut the whole of his first set of teeth,
what ought to be his diet? What should be his breakfast?_

He can, then, have nothing better, where it agrees, than scalding-hot
new milk poured on sliced bread, with a slice or two of bread and butter
to eat with it. Butter, in moderation, is nourishing, fattening, and
wholesome. Moreover, butter tends to keep the bowels regular. These
facts should be borne in mind, as some mothers foolishly keep their
children from butter, declaring it to be too rich for their children’s
stomachs! New milk should be used in preference either to cream or to
skimmed milk. Cream, as a rule, is too rich for the delicate stomach of
a child, and skim-milk is too poor when robbed of the butter which the
cream contains. But give cream and water, where new milk (as is
_occasionally_ the case) does not agree; but never give skim-milk.
_Skim_-milk (among other evils) produces costiveness, and necessitates
the frequent administration of aperients. Cream, on the other hand,
regulates and tends to open the bowels.

Although, as a rule, I am not so partial to cream as I am to good
genuine fresh milk, yet I have found, in cases of great debility, more
especially where a child is much exhausted by some inflammatory disease,
such as inflammation of the lungs, the following food most serviceable:
Beat up, by means of a fork, the yolk of an egg, then mix, little by
little, half a teacupful of very weak _black_ tea, sweeten with one lump
of sugar, and add a tablespoonful of cream. Let the foregoing, by
teaspoonfuls at a time, be frequently given.

The above food is only to be administered until the exhaustion be
removed, and is not to supersede the milk diet, which must, at stated
periods, be given, as I have recommended in answers to previous and
subsequent questions.

When a child has costive bowels, there is nothing better for his
breakfast than well-made and well-boiled oatmeal stir-about, which ought
to be eaten with milk fresh from the cow. Scotch children scarcely take
anything else, and a finer race is not in existence; and, as for physic,
many of them do not even know either the taste or the smell of it!

139. _Have you any remarks to make on cow’s milk, as an article of
food?_

Cow’s milk is a valuable, indeed, an indispensable article of diet for
children; it is most nourishing, wholesome, and digestible. The finest
and the healthiest children are those who, for the first four or five
years of their lives, are fed _principally_ upon it. Milk ought then to
be their staple food.

No young child, as a rule, can live, or, if he live, can be healthy,
unless milk is the staple article of his diet. There is no substitute
for milk. To prove the fattening and strengthening qualities of milk,
look only at a young calf who lives on milk, and on milk alone! He is a
Samson in strength, and is as fat as butter; and all young things are
fat if they are in health!

Milk contains every ingredient to build up the body, which is more than
can be said of any other known substance. A child may live entirely, and
become both healthy and strong, on milk, and on milk alone, as it
contains every constituent of the human body. A child cannot “live by
bread alone,” but he might on milk alone! Milk is animal and
vegetable—it is meat and bread—it is a fluid, but as soon as it reaches
the stomach it becomes a solid—solid food; it is the most important and
valuable article of diet for a child in existence. It is a glorious food
for the young, and must never, in any case, be dispensed with. How is
milk, in the making of cheese, converted into curds? By rennet. What is
rennet? The juice of a calf’s maw or stomach. The moment the milk enters
the human maw or stomach, the juice of the stomach converts it into
curds—into solid food, just as readily as when it enters a calf’s maw or
stomach, and much more readily than by rennet, as the _fresh_ juice is
stronger than the _stale_. An ignorant mother often complains that
because, when her child is sick, the milk curdles, that it is a proof
that it does not agree with him! If, at those times, it did _not_
curdle, it would, indeed, prove that his stomach was in a wretchedly
weak state; she would, then, have abundant cause to be anxious.
“Considering that milk contains in itself most of the constituents of a
perfect diet, and is capable of maintaining life in infancy without the
aid of any other substance, it is marvelous that the consumption of it
is practically limited to so small a class; and not only so, but that in
sick-rooms, where the patient is surrounded with every luxury,
arrow-root, and other compounds containing much less nutriment, should
so often be preferred to it.”

Do not let me be misunderstood. I do not mean to say but that the mixing
of farinaceous food—such as Lemann’s Biscuit Powder, Robb’s Biscuit,
Hards’ Farinaceous Food, Brown and Polson’s Corn Flour, and the like,
with the milk, is an improvement—a great improvement; but still I
maintain that a child might live and thrive, and that for a lengthened
period, on milk—and on milk alone!

A dog will live and fatten for six weeks on milk alone! while he will
starve and die in a shorter period on strong beef-tea alone!

It is a grievous sin for a milkman to adulterate milk. How many a poor
infant has fallen a victim to that crime!—for crime it may truly be
called.

It is folly in the extreme for a mother to bate a milkman down in the
price of his milk; if she does, the milk is sure to be either of
inferior quality, or adulterated, or diluted with water; and woe betide
the poor unfortunate child if it be either the one or the other! The
only way to insure good milk is to go to a respectable cow-keeper, and
let him be made to thoroughly understand the importance of your child
having _genuine_ milk, and that you are then willing to pay a fair
remunerative price for it. Rest assured, that if you have to pay one
penny or even twopence a quart more for _genuine_ milk, it is one of the
best investments that you ever have made, or that you are ever likely to
make, in this world! Cheap and inferior milk might well be called cheap
and nasty; for inferior or adulterated milk is the very essence, the
conglomeration, of nastiness; and, moreover, is very poisonous to a
child’s stomach. One and the principal reason why so many children are
rickety and scrofulous, is the horrid stuff called milk that is usually
given to them. It is a crying evil, and demands a thorough investigation
and reformation, and the individual interference of every parent.
Limited Liability Companies are the order of the day; it would really be
not a bad speculation if one was formed in every large town, in order to
insure good, genuine, and undiluted milk.

_Young_ children, as a rule, are allowed to eat too much meat. It is a
mistaken notion of a mother that they require so much animal food. If
more milk were given, and less meat, they would be healthier, and would
not be so predisposed to disease, especially to skin disease.

I should strongly recommend you, then, to be extravagant in your milk
score. Each child ought, in the twenty-four hours, to take at least a
quart of good, fresh, new milk. It should, of course, be given in
various ways,—as bread and milk, rice puddings, milk, and different
kinds of farinaceous food, stir-about, etc. etc.

140. _But suppose my child will not take milk, he having an aversion to
it, what ought then to be done?_

Boil the milk, and sweeten it to suit his palate. After he has been
accustomed to it for awhile, he will then, probably, like milk.
Gradually reduce the sugar until at length it be dispensed with. A child
will often take milk this way, whereas he will not otherwise touch it.

If a child will not drink milk, he _must_ eat meat; it is absolutely
necessary that he should have either the one or the other; and, if he
has cut nearly all his teeth, he ought to have both meat and milk—the
former in moderation, the latter in abundance.

141. _Supposing milk should not agree with my child, what must then be
done?_

Milk, either boiled or unboiled, almost always agrees with a child. If
it does not, it must be looked upon as the exception, and not the rule.
I would, in such a case, advise one-eighth of lime-water to be added to
seven-eighths of new milk—that is to say, two tablespoonfuls of
lime-water should be mixed with half a pint of new milk.

142. _Can you tell me of a way to prevent milk, in hot weather from
turning sour?_

Let the jug of milk be put into a crock containing ice—either in the
dairy or in the cellar. The ice should be kept wrapped either in a
flannel or in a blanket, in a cool place until it be wanted.

143. _Is it necessary to give a child luncheon?_

If he want anything to eat between breakfast and dinner, let him have a
piece of _dry_ bread; and if he has eaten very heartily at dinner, and,
like Oliver Twist, “asks for more!” give him, to satisfy his craving, a
piece of _dry_ bread. He will never eat more of that than will do him
good, and yet he will take sufficient to satisfy his hunger, which is
very important.

144. _What ought now to be his dinner?_

He should now have meat, either mutton or beef, daily, which must be cut
up very small, and should be mixed with mealy _mashed_ potato and gravy.
He ought _always_ to be accustomed to eat salt with his dinner. Let a
mother see that this advice is followed, or evil consequences will
inevitably ensue. Let him be closely watched, to ascertain that he well
masticates his food, and that he does not eat too quickly; for young
children are apt to bolt their food.

145. _Have you any objection to pork for a change?_

I have a great objection to it for the young. It is a rich, gross, and
therefore unwholesome food for the delicate stomach of a child. I have
known it, in several instances, produce violent pain, sickness, purging,
and convulsions. If a child be fed much upon such meat, it will be
likely to produce “breakings-out” on the skin. In fine, his blood will
put on the same character as the food he is fed with. Moreover, pork
might be considered a _strong_ meat, and “_strong_ meat and _strong_
drink can only be taken by _strong_ men.”

146. _Do you approve of veal for a child?_

My objection to pork was, that it was rich and gross; this does not
apply to veal; but the objection to it is, that it is more difficult of
digestion than either mutton or beef.

147. _Do you disapprove of salted and boiled beef for a child?_

If beef be _much_ salted it is hard of digestion, and therefore ought
not to be given to him; but if it has been but _slightly_ salted, then
for a change there will be no objection to a little.

There is no necessity in the _winter_ time to _salt_ meat intended for
boiling; then, boiled _unsalted_ meat makes a nice change for a child’s
dinner. Salt, of course, _must_ with the unsalted meat be eaten.

148. _But suppose there is nothing on the table that a child may with
impunity eat?_

He should then have either a grilled mutton-chop, or a lightly boiled
egg; indeed, the latter, at any time, makes an excellent change.

149. _Are potatoes an unwholesome food for a child?_

New ones are; but old potatoes, well cooked and mealy, are the best
vegetables he can have. They ought to be _well mashed_, as I have known
lumps of potatoes cause convulsions.

150. _Do you approve of any other vegetables for a child?_

Occasionally. Either asparagus, or broccoli, or cauliflower, or turnips,
or French beans, which latter should be cut up fine, may with advantage
be given.

151. _Might not a mother be too particular in dieting her child?_

Certainly not. If blood can be too pure and too good she might! When we
take into account that the food we eat is converted into blood; that if
the food be good, the blood is good; and that if the food be improper or
impure, the blood is impure likewise; and, moreover, when we know that
every part of the body is built up by the blood, we cannot be considered
to be too particular in making our selection of food. Besides, if
indigestible or improper food be taken into the stomach, the blood will
not only be made impure, but the stomach and the bowels will be
disordered.

Do not let me be misunderstood: I am no advocate for a child having the
same food one day as another—certainly not. Let there be variety, but
let it be _wholesome_ variety. Variety in a child’s (not in an infant’s)
food is necessary. If he were fed, day after day, on mutton, his stomach
would at length be brought into that state that in time it would not
properly digest any other meat, and a miserable existence would be the
result.

152. _What ought a child to drink with his dinner?_

Toast and water, or, if he prefer it, plain spring water. Let him have
as much as he likes. If you give him water to drink, there is no fear of
his taking too much; Nature will tell him when he has had enough. Be
careful of the quality of the water, and the source from which you
procure it. Soft spring water from a moderately deep well is the best.
If it come from a land spring, it is apt, indeed is almost sure, to be
contaminated by drains, etc., which is a frequent cause of fevers, of
diphtheria, of Asiatic cholera, and of other blood poisons.

Guard against the drinking water being contaminated with lead; never,
therefore, allow the water to be collected in leaden cisterns, as it
sometimes is if the water be obtained from Water-works’ companies. Lead
pumps, for the same reason, ought never to be used for drinking
purposes. Paralysis, constipation, lead colic, dropping of the wrist,
wasting of the ball of the thumb, loss of memory and broken and ruined
health might result from neglect of this advice.

All honor to the man who first invented the Drinking Fountain, and all
honor to the mayors and corporations of towns who see that they are kept
in good, efficient working order! The drinking fountains are a great
boon to poor children, as water, and plenty of it, is one of the chief
necessaries of their very existence; and, unfortunately, at their own
homes they are not, oftentimes, able to obtain a sufficient supply.
Moreover, drinking fountains are the best advocates for temperance.

Some parents are in the habit of giving their children beer with their
dinners, making them live as they live themselves! This practice is
truly absurd, and fraught with great danger—not only so, but it is
inducing a child to be fond of that which in after life might be his
bane and curse. No good end can be obtained by it; it will not
strengthen so young a child; it will, on the contrary, create fever, and
will thereby weaken him; it will act injuriously upon his delicate,
nervous, and vascular systems, and might be a means of producing
inflammation either of the brain or of its membranes, and might thus
cause water on the brain (a disease to which young children are
subject), or it might induce inflammation of the lungs.

158. _What ought a child who has cut his teeth to have for his supper?_

The same that he has for breakfast. He should sup at six o’clock.

154. _Have you any general remarks to make on a child’s meals?_

I recommended a great sameness in an _infant’s_ diet; but a _child’s_
meals, his dinners especially, ought to be much varied. For instance, do
not let him have, day after day, mutton; but ring the changes on mutton,
beef, poultry, game, and even occasionally fish—sole or cod.

Not only let there be a change of meat, but let there be a change in the
manner of cooking it: let the meat sometimes be roasted; at other times
let it be boiled. I have known a mother who has prided herself as being
experienced in these matters, feed her child, day after day, on
mutton-chops! Such a proceeding is most injurious to him, as after
awhile his unfortunate stomach will digest nothing but mutton-chops,
and, in time, not even those!

With regard to vegetables, potatoes—_mashed_ potatoes—ought to be his
staple vegetable; but every now and then, cauliflower, asparagus,
turnips, and French beans should be given.

With respect to puddings, vary them—rice, one day; suet, another;
batter, a third; tapioca, a fourth; or, even occasionally, he might have
either apple or gooseberry or rhubarb-pudding, provided the pastry be
plain and light.

It is an excellent plan, as I have before remarked, to let a child eat
jam—such as strawberry, raspberry, or gooseberry—and that without stint,
either with rice or with batter puddings.

_Variety of diet_, then, is _good for a child_: it will give him muscle,
bone, and sinew; and, what is very important, it will tend to regulate
his bowels, and it will thus prevent the necessity of giving him
aperients.

But do not stuff a child—do not press him, as is the wont of some
mothers, to eat more than he feels inclined. On the contrary, if you
think that he is eating too much—that he is overloading his stomach—and
if he should ask for more, then, instead of giving him either more meat
or more pudding, give him a piece of dry bread. By doing so, you may
rest assured that he will not eat more than is absolutely good for him.

155. _If a child be delicate, is there any objection to a little wine,
such as cowslip or tent, to strengthen him?_

Wine ought not to be given to a child unless it be ordered by a medical
man: it is even more injurious than beer. Wine, beer, and spirits
principally owe their strength to the alcohol they contain; indeed,
nearly _all_ wines are _fortified_ (as it is called) with brandy. Brandy
contains a large quantity of alcohol, more than any other liquor,
namely, 55.3 per cent. If, therefore, you give wine, it is, in point of
fact, giving diluted brandy—diluted alcohol; and alcohol acts, unless it
be used as a medicine, and under skillful medical advice, as a poison to
a child.

156. _Suppose a child suddenly to lose his appetite: is any notice to be
taken of it?_

If he cannot eat well, depend upon it there is something wrong about the
system. If he be teething, let a mother look well to his gums, and
satisfy herself that they do not require lancing. If they be red, hot,
and swollen, send for a medical man, that he may scarify them. If his
gums be not inflamed, and no tooth appears near, let her look well to
the state of his bowels; let her ascertain that they be sufficiently
opened, and that the stools be of a proper consistence, color, and
smell. If they be neither the one nor the other, give a dose of aperient
medicine, which will generally put all to rights. If the gums be cool,
and the bowels be right, and his appetite continue bad, call in medical
aid.

A child asking for something to eat is frequently, in a severe illness,
the first favorable symptom; we may generally then prognosticate that
all will soon be well again.

If a child refuse his food, neither coax nor tempt him to eat: as food
without an appetite will do him more harm than it will do him good; it
may produce either sickness, bowel complaint, or fever. Depend upon it,
there is always a cause for want of appetite;—perhaps his stomach has
been overworked, and requires repose; or his bowels are loaded, and
Nature wishes to take time to use up the old material;—there might be
fever lurking in his system; Nature stops the supplies, and thus
endeavors, by not giving it food to work with, to nip it in the
bud;—there might be inflammation; food would then be improper, as it
would only add fuel to the fire; let, therefore, the cause be either an
overworked stomach, overloaded bowels, fever, or inflammation, food
would be injurious. Kind Nature, if we will but listen to her voice,
will tell us when to eat and when to refrain.

157. _When a child is four or five years old, have you any objection to
his drinking tea?_

Some parents are in the habit of giving their children strong (and
frequently green) tea. This practice is most hurtful. It acts
injuriously upon their delicate, nervous system, and thus weakens their
whole frame. If milk does not agree, a cup of very weak tea, that is to
say, water with a dash of _black_ tea in it, with a tablespoonful of
cream, may be substituted for milk; but a mother must never give tea
where milk agrees.

158. _Have you any objection to a child occasionally having either cakes
or sweetmeats?_

I consider them as so much slow poison. Such things both cloy and weaken
the stomach, and thereby take away the appetite, and thus debilitate the
frame. Moreover, “sweetmeats are colored with poisonous pigments.” A
mother, surely, is not aware that when she is giving her child sugar
confectionery she is, in many cases, administering a deadly poison to
him? “We beg to direct the attention of our readers to the Report of the
Analytical Sanitary Commission, contained in the _Lancet_, on the
pigments employed in coloring articles of sugar confectionery. From this
report it appears that metallic pigments, of a highly dangerous and even
poisonous character, containing chromic acid, lead, copper, mercury, and
arsenic, are commonly used in the coloring of such articles.”

If a child be never allowed to eat cakes and sweetmeats, he will
consider a piece of dry bread a luxury, and will eat it with the
greatest relish.

159. _Is baker’s or is home-made bread the most wholesome for a child?_

Baker’s bread is certainly the lightest; and, if we could depend upon
its being unadulterated, would, from its lightness, be the most
wholesome; but as we cannot always depend upon baker’s bread, home-made
bread, as a rule, should be preferred. If it be at all heavy, a child
must not be allowed to partake of it; a baker’s loaf ought then to be
sent for, and continued to be eaten until light home-made bread can be
procured. Heavy bread is most indigestible. He must not be allowed to
eat bread until it be two or three days old. If it be a week old, in
cold weather, it will be the more wholesome.

160. _Do you approve either of caraway seeds or of currants in bread or
in cakes—the former to disperse wind, the latter to open the bowels?_

There is nothing better than plain bread: the caraway seeds generally
pass through the bowels undigested, and thus might irritate, and might
produce, instead of disperse wind. Although caraway seeds _whole_ are
unwholesome, yet caraway-tea, made as recommended in question 97, is an
excellent remedy to disperse wind. Some mothers put currants in cakes,
with a view of opening the bowels of their children; but they only open
them by disordering them.

161. _My child has an antipathy to certain articles of diet: what would
you advise to be done?_

A child’s antipathy to certain articles of diet should be respected: it
is a sin and a shame to force him to eat what he has a great dislike to:
a child, for instance, sometimes dislikes the fat of meat, underdone
meat, the skin off boiled milk and off rice-pudding. Why should he not
have his likes and dislikes as well as “children of a larger growth?”
Besides, there is an idiosyncrasy—a peculiarity of the constitution in
some children—and Nature oftentimes especially points out what is good
and what is bad for them individually, and we are not to fly in the face
of Nature. “What is one man’s meat is another man’s poison.” If a child
be forced to eat what he dislikes, it will most likely not only make him
sick, but will disorder his stomach and bowels: food, if it is really to
do him good, must be eaten by him with a relish, and not with disgust
and aversion. Some mothers, who are strict disciplinarians, pride
themselves on compelling their children to eat whatever they choose to
give them! Such children are to be pitied!

162. _When ought a child to commence to dine with his parents?_

As soon as he be old enough to sit up at the table, provided the father
and mother either dine or lunch in the middle of the day. “I always
prefer having children about me at meal-times. I think it makes them
little gentlemen and gentlewomen in a manner that nothing else will.”




                              THE NURSERY.


163. _Have you any remarks to make on the selection, the ventilation,
the warming, the temperature, and the arrangements of a nursery? and
have you any further observations to offer conducive to the well-doing
of my child?_

The nursery ought to be the largest and the most airy room in the house.
In the town, if it be in the topmost story (provided the apartment be
large and airy) so much the better, as the air will then be purer. The
architect, in the building of a house, ought to be particularly directed
to pay attention to the space, the loftiness, the ventilation, the
light, the warming, and the conveniences of a nursery. A bath-room
attached to it will be of great importance and benefit to the health of
a child.

It will, also, be advantageous to have a water-closet near at hand,
which should be well supplied with water, be well drained, and be well
ventilated. If this be not practicable, the evacuations ought to be
removed as soon as they are passed. It is a filthy and an idle habit of
a nurse-maid to allow a motion to remain for any length of time in the
room.

The VENTILATION of a nursery is of paramount importance. There ought to
be a constant supply of fresh, pure air in the apartment. But how few
nurseries have fresh, pure air? Many nurseries are nearly hermetically
sealed—the windows are seldom, if ever, opened; the doors are
religiously closed; and, in the summer time, the chimneys are carefully
stuffed up, so that a breath of air is not allowed to enter! The
consequences are, the poor unfortunate children “are poisoned by their
own breaths,” and are made so delicate that they are constantly catching
cold; indeed, it might be said that they are laboring under chronic
catarrhs, all rising from Nature’s laws being set at defiance.

The windows ought to be large, and should be made to freely open both
top and bottom. Whenever the child is out of the nursery the windows
ought to be thrown wide open; indeed, when he is in it, if the weather
be fine, the upper sash should be a little lowered. A child should be
encouraged to change the room frequently, in order that it may be freely
ventilated; for good air is as necessary to his health as wholesome
food, and air cannot be good if it be not frequently changed. If you
wish to have a strong and healthy child, ponder over and follow this
advice.

I have to enter my protest against the use of a stove in a nursery. I
consider a gas stove _without a chimney_ to be an abomination, most
destructive to human life. There is nothing like the old-fashioned open
fire-place, with a good-sized chimney, so that it may not only carry off
the smoke, but also the impure air of the room.

Be sure to have a fire-guard around the grate, and be strict in not
allowing your child either to touch or to play with fire; frightful
accidents have occurred from mothers and nurses being on these points
lax.

The nursery ought to have a large fire-guard, to go all round the
hearth, and which should be sufficiently high to prevent a child from
climbing over. Not only must the nursery have a guard, but every room
where he is allowed to go should be furnished with one on the bars.

Moreover, it will be necessary to have a guard in every room where a
fire is burning, to protect the ladies, who, in accordance with the
present fashion, wear such preposterous crinolines, and thus to prevent
the frightful deaths which are at the present time of such frequent and
startling occurrence; lady-burning is now one of the institutions of our
land!

A nursery is usually kept too hot; the temperature in the winter time
ought _not to exceed_ 60 degrees Fahrenheit. A _good_ thermometer should
be considered an indispensable requisite to a nursery. A child in a hot,
close nursery is bathed in perspiration; if he leave the room to go to
one of lower temperature, the pores of the skin are suddenly closed, and
either a severe cold, or an inflammation of the lungs, or an attack of
bronchitis, is likely to ensue. Moreover, the child is both weakened and
enervated by the heat, and thus readily falls a prey to disease.

A child ought never to be permitted to sit with his back to the fire; if
he be allowed, it weakens his spine, and thus his whole frame; it causes
a rush of blood to the head and face, and predisposes him to catch cold.

Let a nurse make a point of opening the nursery window every time that
she and her little charge leave the nursery, if their absence be only
for half an hour. The mother herself ought to see that this advice is
followed, pure air is so essential to the well-being of a child. Pure
air and pure water, and, let me add, pure milk, are for a child the
grand and principal requirements of health. “Pure air and water are
practically the two great elements of health.”—_The Times._

Look well to the DRAINAGE of your house and neighborhood. A child is
very susceptible to the influence of bad drainage. Bad drains are
fruitful sources of scarlet fever, of diphtheria, of diarrhœa, etc. “It
is sad to be reminded, that, whatever evils threaten the health of a
population, whether from pollutions of water or of air,—whether from bad
drainage or overcrowding, they fall heaviest on the most innocent
victims—upon children of tender years. Their delicate frames are
infinitely more sensitive than the hardened constitutions of adults, and
the breath of poison or the chill of hardships easily blights their
tender life.”

A nursery floor ought not to be _washed_ oftener than once a week; and
then the child or children should, until it be dry, be sent into another
room. During the drying of the floor, the windows must, of course, be
thrown _wide_ open.

The constant _wetting_ of a nursery is a frequent source of illness
among children. The floor ought, of course, to be kept clean; but this
may be done by the servant thoroughly sweeping the room out every
morning before her little charge makes his appearance.

Do not have your nursery walls covered with _green_ paper-hangings.
Green paper-hangings contain large quantities of arsenic—arsenite of
copper (Scheele’s green)—which, I need scarcely say, is a virulent
poison, and which flies about the room in the form of powder. There is
frequently enough poison on the walls of a room to destroy a whole
neighborhood.

There is another great objection to having your nursery walls covered
with _green_ paper-hangings; if any of the paper should become loose
from the walls, a little child is very apt to play with it, and to put
it, as he does everything else, to his mouth. This is not an imaginary
state of things, as four children in one family have just lost their
lives from sucking green paper-hangings.

Green dresses, as they are colored with a preparation of arsenic, are
equally as dangerous as green paper-hangings; a child ought, therefore,
never to wear a _green_ dress. “It may be interesting to some of our
readers,” says _Land and Water_, “to know that the new green, so
fashionable for ladies’ dresses, is just as dangerous in its nature as
the green wall-paper, about which so much was written some time since.
It is prepared with a large quantity of arsenic; and we have been
assured by several of the leading dressmakers that the work-women
employed in making up dresses of this color are seriously affected with
all the symptoms of arsenical poison. Let our lady friends take care.”

Children’s toys are frequently painted of a green color with arsenic of
copper, and are, consequently, highly dangerous to play with. The best
toy for a child is a box of unpainted wooden bricks, which is a constant
source of amusement to him.

If you have your nursery walls hung with paintings and engravings, let
them be of good quality. The horrid daubs and bad engravings that
usually disfigure nursery walls, are enough to ruin the taste of a
child, and to make him take a disgust to drawing, which would be a
misfortune. A fine engraving and a good painting expand and elevate his
mind. We all know that first impressions are the most vivid and the most
lasting. A taste in early life for everything refined and beautiful
purifies his mind, cultivates his intellect, keeps him from low company,
and makes him grow up a gentleman!

Lucifer matches, in case of sudden illness, should, both in the nursery
and in the bed-room, always be in readiness; but they must be carefully
placed out of the reach of children, as lucifer matches are a deadly
poison.

164. _Have you any observation to make on the_ LIGHT _of the nursery_?

Let the window, or, what is better, the windows, of a nursery be very
large, so as to thoroughly light up every nook and corner of the room,
as there is nothing more conducive to the health of a child than an
abundance of light in the dwelling.

A room cannot, then, be too light. The windows of a nursery are
generally too small. A child requires as much light as a plant.
Gardeners are well aware of the great importance of light in the
construction of their greenhouses, and yet a child, who requires it as
much, and is of much greater importance, is cooped up in dark rooms!

The windows of a nursery ought not only to be frequently opened to let
in fresh air, _but should be frequently cleaned_, to let in plenty of
light and of sunshine, as nothing is so cheering and beneficial to a
child as an abundance of light and sunshine!

_With regard to the best artificial light for a nursery._—The air of a
nursery cannot be too pure; I therefore do not advise you to have gas in
it, as gas in burning gives off quantities of carbonic acid and
sulphuretted hydrogen, which vitiate the air. There is no better light
for a nursery than either Price’s patent candles or the old-fashioned
tallow candle.

Let a child’s _home_ be the happiest _house_ to him in all the world;
and to be happy he must be merry, and all around him should be merry and
cheerful; and he ought to have an abundance of playthings, to help on
the merriment.

If he has a dismal nurse, and a dismal home, he may as well be
incarcerated in prison, and be attended by a jailer. It is sad enough to
see dismal, doleful men and women, but it is a truly lamentable and
unnatural sight to see a doleful child! The young ought to be as playful
and as full of innocent mischief as a kitten. There will be quite time
enough in after-years for sorrow and for sadness.

Bright colors, plenty of light, _clean_ windows (mind this, if you
please), an abundance of _good_-colored prints, and toys without number,
are the proper furnishings of a nursery. Nursery! why, the very name
tells you what it ought to be—the home of childhood,—the most important
room in the house,—a room that will greatly tend to stamp the character
of your child for the remainder of his life.

165. _Have you any more hints to offer conducive to the well-doing of my
child?_

You cannot be too particular in the choice of those who are in constant
attendance upon him. You yourself, of course, must be his
_head-nurse_—you only require some one to take the drudgery off your
hands!

You ought to be particularly careful in the selection of his nurse. She
should be steady, lively, truthful, and good-tempered; and must be free
from any natural imperfection, such as squinting, stammering, etc., for
a child is such an imitative creature that he is likely to acquire that
defect, which in the nurse is natural. “Children, like babies, are quick
at ‘taking notice.’ What they see they mark, and what they mark they are
very prone to copy.”

She ought not to be very young, or she may be thoughtless, careless, and
giggling. You have no right to set a child to mind a child; it would be
like the blind leading the blind. No! a child is too precious a treasure
to be intrusted to the care and keeping of a young girl. Many a child
has been ruined for life by a careless young nurse dropping him and
injuring his spine.

A nurse ought to be both strong and active, in order that her little
charge may have plenty of good nursing; for it requires great strength
in the arms to carry a heavy child for the space of an hour or two, at a
stretch, in the open air; and such is absolutely necessary, and is the
only way to make him strong, and to cause him to cut his teeth easily,
and at the same time to regulate his bowels; a nurse, therefore, must be
strong and active, and not mind hard work, for hard work it is; but
after she is accustomed to it, pleasant notwithstanding.

Never should a nurse be allowed to wear a mask, nor to dress up and
paint herself as a ghost, or as any other frightful object. A child is
naturally timid and full of fears, and what would not make the slightest
impression upon a grown-up person, might throw a child into fits—

                     “The sleeping and the dead,
             Are but as pictures: ’tis the age of childhood
             That fears a painted devil.”

Never should she be permitted to tell her little charge frightful
stories of ghosts and hobgoblins; if this be allowed, the child’s
disposition will become timid and wavering, and may continue so for the
remainder of his life.

If a little fellow were not terrified by such stories, the darkness
would not frighten him more than the light. Moreover, the mind thus
filled with fear, acts upon the body, and injures the health. A child
must never be placed in a dark cellar, nor frightened by tales of rats,
etc. Instances are related of fear thus induced impairing the intellect
for life; and there are numerous examples of sudden fright causing a
dangerous and even a fatal illness.

_Night-terrors._—This frightening of a child by a silly nurse frequently
brings on night-terrors. He wakes up suddenly, soon after going to
sleep, frightened and terrified; screaming violently, and declaring that
he has seen either some ghost, or thief, or some object that the silly
nurse had been previously in the day describing, who is come for him to
take him away. The little fellow is the very picture of terror and
alarm; he hides his face in his mother’s bosom, the perspiration streams
down him, and it is some time before he can be pacified—when, at length,
he falls into a troubled, feverish slumber, to awake in the morning
unrefreshed. Night after night these terrors harass him, until his
health materially suffers, and his young life becomes miserable, looking
forward with dread to the approach of darkness.

_Treatment of night-terrors._—If they have been caused by the folly of
the nurse, discharge her at once, and be careful to select a more
discreet one. When the child retires to rest leave a candle burning, and
let it burn all night; sit with him until he be asleep; and take care,
in case he should rouse up in one of his night-terrors, that either you
yourself or some kind person be near at hand. Do not scold him for being
frightened—he cannot help it; but soothe him, calm him, fondle him, take
him into your arms, and let him feel that he has some one to rest upon,
to defend and to protect him. It is frequently in these cases necessary
before he can be cured to let him have change of air and change of
scene. Let him live in the daytime, a great part of the day, in the open
air.

A nurse-maid should never, on any account whatever, be allowed to whip a
child. “Does ever any man or woman remember the feeling of being
‘whipped’ as a child, the fierce anger, the insupportable ignominy, the
longing for revenge, which blotted out all thought of contrition for the
fault or rebellion against the punishment? With this recollection on
their own parts, I can hardly suppose any parents venturing to inflict
it, much less allowing its infliction by another under any circumstances
whatever. A nurse-maid or domestic of any sort, once discovered to have
lifted up her hand against a child, ought to meet instant severe rebuke,
and on a repetition of the offense instant dismissal.”

I have seen in the winter time a lazy nurse sit before the fire with a
child on her lap, rubbing his cold feet just before putting him to his
bed. Now this is not the way to warm his feet. The right method is to
let him romp and run either about the room, or the landing, or the
hall—this will effectually warm them; but, of course, it will entail a
little extra trouble on the nurse, as she will have to use a little
exertion to induce him to do so, and this extra trouble a lazy nurse
will not relish. Warming the feet before the fire will give the little
fellow chilblains, and will make him when he is in bed more chilly. The
only way for him to have a good romp before he goes to bed, is for the
mother to join in the game. She may rest assured, that if she does so,
her child will not be the only one to benefit by it. She herself will
find it of marvelous benefit to her own health; it will warm her own
feet, it will be almost sure to insure her a good night, and will make
her feel so light and buoyant as almost to fancy that she is a girl
again! Well, then, let every child, before he retire to bed, hold a high
court of revelry, let him have an hour—the Children’s Hour—devoted to
romp, to dance, to riot, and to play, and let him be the master of the
revels—

               “Between the dark and the daylight,
                 When the night is beginning to lower,
               Comes a pause in the day’s occupation,
                 Which is known as the Children’s Hour.”

Let a child be employed—take an interest in his employment, let him
fancy that he is useful—_and he is useful_, he is laying in a stock of
health. He is much more usefully employed than many other grown-up
children are!

A child should be happy; he must, in every way, be made happy;
everything ought to be done to conduce to his happiness, to give him
joy, gladness, and pleasure. Happy he should be, as happy as the day is
long. Kindness should be lavished upon him. Make a child understand that
you love him; prove it in your actions—these are better than words; look
after his little pleasures—join in his little sports; let him never hear
a morose word—it would rankle in his breast, take deep root, and in due
time bring forth bitter fruit. Love! let love be his polestar; let it be
the guide and the rule of all you do and all you say unto him. Let your
face, as well as your tongue, speak love. Let your hands be ever ready
to minister to his pleasures and to his play. “Blessed be the hand that
prepares a pleasure for a child, for there is no saying when and where
it may again bloom forth. Does not almost everybody remember some
kind-hearted man who showed him a kindness in the dulcet days of
childhood? The writer of this recollects himself, at this moment, a
bare-footed lad, standing at the wooden fence of a poor little garden in
his native village, while, with longing eyes, he gazed on the flowers
which were blooming there quietly in the brightness of the Sabbath
morning. The possessor came from his little cottage. He was a
wood-cutter by trade, and spent the whole week at work in the woods. He
had come into the garden to gather flowers to stick in his coat when he
went to church. He saw the boy, and breaking off the most beautiful of
his carnations (it was streaked with red and white), he gave it to him.
Neither the giver nor the receiver spoke a word, and with bounding steps
the boy ran home. And now, here, at a vast distance from that home,
after so many events of so many years, the feeling of gratitude which
agitated the breast of that boy, expressed itself on paper. The
carnation has long since faded, but it now bloometh afresh.”

The hearty ringing laugh of a child is sweet music to the ear. There are
three most joyous sounds in nature—the hum of a bee, the purr of a cat,
and the laugh of a child. They tell of peace, of happiness, and of
contentment, and make one for awhile forget that there is so much misery
in the world.

A man who dislikes children is unnatural; he has no “milk of human
kindness” in him; he should be shunned. Give me, for a friend, a man—

                   “Who takes the children on his knee,
                 And winds their curls about his hand.”

166. _If a child be peevish, and apparently in good health, have you any
plan to offer to allay his irritability?_

A child’s troubles are soon over—his tears are soon dried; “nothing
dries sooner than a tear”—if not prolonged by improper management:

              “The tear down childhood’s cheek that flows,
              Is like the dewdrop on the rose;
              When next the summer breeze comes by,
              And waves the bush, the flower is dry.”

Never allow a child to be teased; it spoils his temper. If he be in a
cross humor take no notice of it, but divert his attention to some
pleasing object. This may be done without spoiling him. Do not combat
bad temper with bad temper—noise with noise. Be firm, be kind, be
gentle, be loving, speak quietly, smile tenderly, and embrace him
fondly, but _insist upon implicit obedience_, and you will have, with
God’s blessing, a happy child: “But we were gentle among you, even as a
woman cherisheth her children.”—I. Thess. ii. 7.

                 “When a little child is weak,
                   From fever passing by,
                 Or wearied out with restlessness,
                   Don’t scold him if he cry.

                 Tell him some pretty story—
                   Don’t read it from a book;
                 He likes to watch you while you speak,
                   And take in every look.

                 Or sometimes singing gently—
                   A little song may please,
                 With quiet and amusing words,
                   And tune that flows with ease.

                 Or if he is impatient,
                   Perhaps from time to time
                 A simple hymn may suit the best,
                   In short and easy rhyme.

                 The measured verses flowing
                   In accents clear and mild,
                 May blend into his troubled thought,
                   And soothe the little child,

                 But let the words be simple,
                   And suited to his mind,
                 And loving, that his weary heart
                   A resting-place may find.”

Speak _gently_ to a child; speak _gently_ to all; but more especially
speak _gently_ to a child. “A gentle voice is an excellent thing in
woman,” and is a jewel of great price, and is one of the concomitants of
a _perfect_ lady. Let the hinges of your disposition be well oiled. “‘I
have a dear friend. He was one of those well-oiled dispositions which
turn upon the hinges of the world without creaking.’ Would to heaven
there were more of them! How many there are who never turn upon the
hinges of this world without a grinding that sets the teeth of a whole
household on edge! And somehow or other it has been the evil fate of
many of the best spirits to be so circumstanced; both men and women, to
whom life is ‘sweet habitude of being,’ which has gone far to reconcile
them to solitude as far less intolerable! To these especially the
creakings of those said rough hinges of the world is one continued
torture, for they are all too finely strung; and the oft-recurring grind
jars the whole sentient frame, mars the beautiful lyre, and makes cruel
discord in a soul of music. How much of sadness there is in such
thoughts! Seems there not a Past in some lives to which it is impossible
ever to become reconciled?”

Pleasant words ought always to be spoken to a child! there must be
neither snarling, nor snapping, nor snubbing, nor loud contention toward
him. If there be it will ruin his temper and disposition, and will make
him hard and harsh, morose and disagreeable.

Do not be always telling your child how wicked he is; what a naughty boy
he is; that God will never love him, and all the rest of such twaddle.
Do not, in point of fact, bully him, as many poor little fellows are
bullied! It will ruin him if you do; it will make him in after-years
either a coward or a tyrant. Such conversations, like constant droppings
of water, will make an impression, and will cause him to feel that it is
of no use to try to be good—that he is hopelessly wicked! Instead of
such language, give him confidence in himself; rather find out his good
points and dwell upon them; praise him where and whenever you can; and
make him feel that, by perseverance and by God’s blessing, he will make
a good man. Speak truthfully to your child; if you once deceive him, he
will not believe you for the future. Not only so, but if you are
truthful yourself you are likely to make him truthful—like begets like.
There is something beautiful in truth! A lying child is an abomination!
Sir Walter Scott says “that he taught his son to ride, to shoot, and to
tell the truth.”

As soon as a child can speak, he should be made to lisp the noble words
of truth, and to love it, and to abhor a lie! What a beautiful character
he will then make! Blessed is that child who can say,—

             “Parental cares watched o’er my growing youth,
             And early stamped it with the love of truth.”

Have no favorites, show no partiality; for the young are very jealous,
sharp-sighted, and quick-witted, and take a dislike to the petted one.
Do not rouse the old Adam in them. Let children be taught to be “kindly
affectionate one to another, with brotherly love;” let them be
encouraged to share each other’s toys and playthings, and to banish
selfishness.

Attend to a child’s _little_ pleasures. It is the _little_ pleasures of
a child that constitute his happiness. Great pleasures to him and to us
all (as a favorite author remarks) come but seldom, and are the
exceptions, and not the rule.

Let a child be nurtured in love. “It will be seen that I hold this law
of kindness as the Alpha and Omega of education. I once asked one, in
his own house, a father in everything but the name, his authority
unquestioned, his least word held in reverence, his smallest wish
obeyed,—‘How did you ever manage to bring up these children?’ He said,
‘_By love!_’”

Let every word and action prove that you love your children. Enter into
all their little pursuits and pleasures. Join them in their play, and
“be a child again!” If they are curious, do not check their curiosity;
but rather encourage it; for they have a great deal—as we all have—to
learn, and how can they know if they are not taught? You can depend upon
it, the knowledge they obtain from observation is far superior to that
obtained from books. Let all you teach them, let all you do, and let all
you say, bear the stamp of love. “Endeavor, from first to last, in your
intercourse with your children, to let it bear the impress of _love_. It
is not enough that you _feel_ affection toward your children—that you
are devoted to their interests; you must show in your manner the
fondness of your hearts toward them. Young minds cannot appreciate great
sacrifices made for them; they judge their parents by the words and
deeds of everyday life. They are won by _little_ kindnesses, and
alienated by _little_ acts of neglect or impatience. One complaint
unnoticed, one appeal unheeded, one lawful request arbitrarily refused,
will be remembered by your little ones more than a thousand acts of the
most devoted affection.”

A placid, well-regulated temper is very conducive to health. A
disordered or an overloaded stomach is a frequent cause of peevishness.
Appropriate treatment in such a case will, of course, be necessary.

167. _My child stammers: can you tell me the cause, and can you suggest
a remedy?_

A child who stammers is generally “nervous,” quick, and impulsive. His
ideas flow too rapidly for speech. He is “nervous:” hence, when he is
alone, and with those he loves, he oftentimes speaks fluently and well;
he stammers more both when he is tired, and when he is out of
health—when the nerves are either weak or exhausted. He is emotional:
when he is either in a passion or in excitement, either of joy or of
grief, he can scarcely speak—“he stammers all over.” He is impulsive: he
often stammers in consequence. He is in too great a hurry to bring out
his words; they do not flow in a proper sequence; hence his words are
broken and disjointed.

Stammering, of course, might be owing either to some organic defect,
such as from defective palate, or from defective brain, then nothing
will cure him; or it might be owing to “nervous” causes—to “irregular
nervous action,” then a cure might, with care and perseverance, be
usually effected.

In all cases of stammering of a child, let both the palate of his mouth
and the bridle of his tongue be carefully examined, to see that neither
the palate be defective, nor the bridle of the tongue be too short—that
he be not tongue-tied.

_Now, with regard to treatment._ Make him speak slowly and deliberately;
let him form each word, without clipping or chopping; let him be made,
when you are alone with him, to exercise himself in elocution. If he
speak quickly, stop him in his mid-career, and make him, quietly and
deliberately, go through the sentence again and again, until he has
mastered the difficulty; teach him to collect his thoughts, and to weigh
each word ere he give it utterance; practice him in singing little hymns
and songs for children; this you will find a valuable help in the cure.
A stammerer seldom stutters when he sings. When he sings, he has a full
knowledge of the words, and is obliged to keep in time—to sing neither
too fast nor too slow. Besides, he sings in a different key to his
speaking voice. Many professors for the treatment of stammering cure
their patients by practicing lessons of a sing-song character.

Never jeer him for stammering, nor turn him to ridicule; if you do, it
will make him ten times worse; but be patient and gentle with him, and
endeavor to give him confidence, and encourage him to speak to you as
quietly, as gently, and deliberately as you speak to him; tell him not
to speak until he has arranged his thoughts and chosen his words; let
him do nothing in a hurry.

Demosthenes was said, in his youth, to have stammered fearfully, and to
have cured himself by his own prescription, namely, by putting a pebble
in his mouth, and declaiming, frequently, slowly, quietly, and
deliberately, on the sea-shore—the fishes alone being his
audience,—until, at length, he cured himself, and charmed the world with
his eloquence and with his elocution. He is held up, to this very day,
as the personification and as the model of an orator. His patience,
perseverance, and practice ought, by all who either are, or are
interested in a stammerer, to be borne in mind and followed.

168. _Do you approve of a carpet in a nursery?_

No; unless it be a small piece for the child to roll upon. A carpet
harbors dirt and dust, which dust is constantly floating about the
atmosphere, and thus making it impure for him to breathe. The truth of
this may easily be ascertained by entering a darkened room, where a ray
of sunshine is struggling through a crevice in the shutters. If the
floor of a nursery must be covered, let drugget be laid down; as this
every morning may be taken up and shaken. The less furniture a nursery
contains the better; for much furniture obstructs the free circulation
of the air, and, moreover, prevents a child from taking proper exercise
in the room.

169. _Supposing there is not a fire in the nursery grate, ought the
chimney to be stopped to prevent a draught in the room?_

Certainly not. I consider the use of a chimney to be twofold: first, to
carry off the smoke; and secondly (which is of quite as much
importance), to ventilate the room, by carrying off the impure air,
loaded as it is with carbonic acid gas, the refuse of respiration. The
chimney, therefore, should never, either winter or summer, be allowed
for one moment to be stopped. This is important advice, and requires the
strict supervision of every mother, as servants will, if they have the
chance, stop all chimneys that have no fires in the grates.




                               EXERCISE.


170. _Do you approve, during the summer months, of sending a child out_
BEFORE _breakfast_?

I do, when the weather will permit, and provided the wind be neither in
an easterly nor in a northeasterly direction: indeed, _he can scarcely
be too much in the open air_. He must not be allowed to stand about
draughts or about entries, and the only way to prevent him doing so is
for the mother herself to accompany the nurse. She will then kill two
birds with one stone, as she will, by doing so, benefit her own as well
as her child’s health.

171. _Ought a child to be early put on his feet to walk?_

No: let him learn to walk himself. He ought to be put upon a carpet; and
it will be found that when he is strong enough, he will hold by a chair,
and will stand alone: when he can do so, and attempts to walk, he should
then be supported. You must, on first putting him upon his feet, be
guided by his own wishes. He will, as soon as he is strong enough to
walk, have the inclination to do so. When he has the inclination and the
strength, it will be folly to restrain him; if he has neither the
inclination nor the strength, it will be absurd to urge him on. Rely,
therefore, to a certain extent, upon the inclination of the child
himself. Self-reliance cannot be too early taught him, and, indeed,
every one else. In the generality of instances, however, a child is put
on his feet too soon, and the bones at that tender age, being very
flexible, bend, causing bowed and bandy legs; and the knees, being weak,
approximate too closely together, and thus they become knock-kneed.

This advice of _not_ putting a child _early_ on his feet, I must
strongly insist on, as so many mothers are so ridiculously ambitious
that their young ones should walk early, that they should walk before
other children have attempted to do so, have frequently caused the above
lamentable deformities!

172. _Do you approve of perambulators?_

I do not, for two reasons: first, because when a child is strong enough,
he had better walk as much as he will; and, secondly, the motion is not
so good, and the muscles are not so much put in action, and consequently
cannot be so well developed, as when he is carried. A perambulator is
very apt to make a child stoop, and to make him both crooked and
round-shouldered. He is cramped by being so long in one position. It is
painful to notice a babe a few months old in one of these new-fangled
carriages. His little head is bobbing about, first on one side and then
on the other—at one moment it is dropping on his chest, the next it is
forcibly jolted behind: he looks, and doubtless feels, wretched and
uncomfortable. Again, these perambulators are dangerous in crowded
thoroughfares. They are a public nuisance, inasmuch as they are wheeled
against and between people’s legs, and are a fruitful source of the
breaking of shins, of the spraining of ankles, of the crushing of corns,
and of the ruffling of the tempers of the foot-passengers who
unfortunately come within their reach; while, in all probability, the
gaping nurses are staring another way, and every way indeed but the
right!

Besides, in very cold weather, or in a very young infant, the warmth of
the nurse’s body, while he is being carried, helps to keep him warm, he
himself being naturally cold. In point of fact, the child, while being
borne in the nurse’s arms, reposes on the nurse, warm and supported as
though he were in a nest! While, on the other hand, if he be in a
perambulator, he is cold and unsupported, looking the very picture of
misery, seeking everywhere for rest and comfort, and finding none!

A nurse’s arm, then, is the only proper carriage for a _young_ child to
take exercise on. She ought to change about, first carrying him on the
one arm, and then on the other. Nursing him on one arm only might give
his body a twist on one side, and thus might cause deformity.

When he is old enough to walk, and is able properly to support the
weight of his own neck and back, then there will be no objection,
provided it be not in a crowded thoroughfare, to his riding occasionally
in a perambulator; but when he is older still, and can sit either a
donkey or a pony, such exercise will be far more beneficial, and will
afford him much greater pleasure.

173. _Supposing it to be wet under foot, but dry above, do you then
approve of sending a child out?_

If the wind be neither in the east nor the northeast, and if the air be
not damp, let him be well wrapped up and be sent out. If he be laboring
under an inflammation of the lungs, however slight, or if he be just
recovering from one, it would, of course, be highly improper. In the
management of a child, we must take care neither to coddle nor to expose
him unnecessarily, as both are dangerous.

Never send a child out to walk in a fog; he will, if you do, be almost
sure to catch cold. It would be much safer to send him out in the rain
than in fog; though neither the one nor the other would be desirable.

174. _How many times a day, in fine weather, ought a child to be sent
out?_

Let him be sent out as often as it be possible. If a child lived more in
the open air than he is wont to do, he would neither be so susceptible
of disease, nor would he suffer so much from teething.

175. _Supposing the day to be wet, what exercise would you then
recommend?_

The child ought to run either about a large room or about the hall; and,
if it does not rain violently, you should put on his hat and throw up
the window, taking care while the window is open that he does not stand
still.

Do not on any account allow him to sit any length of time at a table,
amusing himself with books, etc.; let him be acting and stirring, that
his blood may freely circulate as it ought to do, and that his muscles
may be well developed. I would rather see him actively engaged in
mischief, than sitting still, doing nothing. He ought to be put on the
carpet, and should then be tumbled and rolled about, to make the blood
bound merrily through the vessels, to stir up the liver, to promote
digestion, and to open the bowels. The misfortune of it is, the present
race of nurses are so stuck out with crinoline, that they are not able
to stoop properly, and thus to have a good game at romps with their
little charges.

176. _Supposing it to be winter, and the weather to be very cold, would
you still send a child out?_

Decidedly, provided he be well wrapped up. The cold will brace and
strengthen him. Cold weather is the finest tonic in the world.

In frosty weather, the roads being slippery, when you send him out to
walk, put a pair of large, old woolen stockings _over_ his boots or
shoes. This will not only keep his feet and his legs warm, but it will
prevent him from falling down and hurting himself. While thus equipped,
he may even walk on a slide of ice without falling down.

A child, in the winter time, requires, to keep him warm, plenty of
flannel and plenty of food, plenty of fresh and genuine milk, and plenty
of water in his tub to wash him in a morning, plenty of exercise and
plenty of play, and then he may brave the frosty air. It is the coddled,
the half-washed, and the half-starved child (half-washed and
half-starved from either the mother’s ignorance or from the mother’s
timidity), that is the chilly starveling,—catching cold at every breath
of wind, and every time he either walks or is carried out,—a puny,
skinny, scraggy, scare-crow, more dead than alive, and more fit for his
grave than for the rough world he will have to struggle in!




                              AMUSEMENTS.


177. _Have you any remarks to make on the amusements of a child?_

Let the amusements of a child be as much as possible out of doors; let
him spend the greater part of every day in the open air; let him exert
himself as much as he pleases, his feelings will tell him when to rest
and when to begin again; let him be what nature intended him to be—a
happy, laughing, joyous child. Do not let him be always poring over
books.

                “Books! ’tis a dull and endless strife,
                  Come, hear the woodland linnet!
                How sweet his music! On my life
                  There’s more of wisdom in it.

                And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!
                  He, too, is no mean preacher:
                Come forth into the light of things,—
                  Let Nature be your teacher.

                She has a world of ready wealth,
                  Our minds and hearts to bless,—
                Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health,
                  Truth breathed by cheerfulness.

                One impulse from a vernal wood,
                  May teach you more of man,
                Of moral evil and of good,
                  Than all the sages can.”

He ought to be encouraged to engage in those sports wherein the greatest
number of muscles are brought into play. For instance, to play at ball,
or hoop, or football, to play at horses, to run to certain distances and
back; and, if a girl, to amuse herself with a skipping-rope, such being
excellent exercise—

          “By sports like these are all their cares beguiled,—
          The sports of children satisfy the child.”

Every child, where it be practicable, should have a small plot of ground
to cultivate, that he may dig and delve in, and make dirt-pies if he
choose. Children, nowadays, unfortunately, are not allowed to soil their
hands and their fine clothes. For my own part, I dislike such model
children; let a child be natural—let him, as far as is possible, choose
his own sports. Do not be always interfering with his pursuits, and be
finding fault with him. Remember, what may be amusing to you may be
distasteful to him. I do not, of course, mean but that you should
constantly have a watchful eye over him; yet do not let him see that he
is under restraint or surveillance; if you do, you will never discover
his true character and inclinations. Not only so, but do not dim the
bright sunshine of his early life by constantly checking and thwarting
him. Tupper beautifully says:

               “And check not a child in his merriment,—
                 Should not his morning be sunny?”

When, therefore, he is either in the nursery or in the play-ground, let
him shout and riot and romp about as much as he pleases. His lungs and
his muscles want developing, and his nerves require strengthening; and
how can such be accomplished unless you allow them to be developed and
strengthened by natural means?

The nursery is a child’s own domain; it is his castle, and he should be
Lord Paramount therein. If he choose to blow a whistle, or to spring a
rattle, or to make any other hideous noise, which to him is sweet music,
he should be allowed, without let or hindrance, to do so. If any members
of the family have weak nerves, let them keep at a respectful distance.

A child who never gets into mischief must be either sly, or delicate, or
idiotic; indeed, the system of many persons in bringing up children is
likely to make them either the one or the other. The present plan of
training children is nearly all work (books), and very little play.
Play, and plenty of it, is necessary to the very existence of a child.

A boy not partial to mischief, innocent mischief, and play, is
unnatural; he is a man before his time, he is a nuisance, he is
disagreeable to himself and to every one around. “A boy not fond of fun
and frolic may possibly make a tolerable man, but he is an intolerable
boy.”

Girls, at the present time, are made clever simpletons; their brains are
worked with useless knowledge, which totally unfits them for everyday
duties. Their muscles are allowed to be idle, which makes them limp and
flabby. The want of proper exercise ruins the complexion, and their
faces become of the color of a tallow candle! And precious wives and
mothers they make when they do grow up! Grow up, did I say. They grow
all manner of ways, and are as crooked as crooked sticks!

What an unnatural thing it is to confine a child several hours a day to
his lessons; why, you might as well put a colt in harness, and make him
work for his living! A child is made for play; his roguish little eye,
his lithe figure, his antics, and his drollery, all point out that he is
cut out for play—that it is as necessary to his existence as the food he
eats, and as the air he breathes!

A child ought not to be allowed to have playthings with which he can
injure either himself or others, such as toy-swords, toy-cannons,
toy-paint-boxes, knives, bows and arrows, hammers, chisels, saws, etc.
He will not only be likely to injure himself and others, but will make
sad havoc on furniture, house, and other property. Fun, frolic, and play
ought, in all innocent ways, to be encouraged; but willful mischief and
dangerous games ought, by every means, to be discountenanced. This
advice is frequently much needed, as children prefer to have and delight
in dangerous toys, and often coax and persuade weak and indulgent
mothers to gratify their wishes.

_Painted_ toys are, many of them, highly dangerous, those painted
_green_ especially, as the color generally consists of Scheele’s
green—arsenite of copper.

Children’s paint-boxes are very dangerous toys for a child to play with:
many of the paints are poisonous, containing arsenic, lead, gamboge,
etc., and a child, when painting, is apt to put the brush into his
mouth, to absorb the superabundant fluid. Of all the colors, the _green_
paint is the most dangerous, as it is frequently composed of arsenite of
copper—arsenic and copper—two deadly poisons.

There are some paint-boxes warranted not to contain a particle of poison
of any kind: these ought, for a child, to be chosen by a mother.

But, remember, although he ought not to be allowed to have poison
paint-boxes and poison-painted toys, _he must have an abundance of
toys_, such as the white-wood toys—brewers’ drays, millers’ wagons,
boxes of wooden bricks, etc. The Noah’s Ark is one of the most amusing
and instructive toys for a child. “Those fashioned out of brown,
unpainted pine-wood by the clever carvers of Nuremberg or the Black
Forest are the best, I think, not only because they are the most
spirited, but because they will survive a good deal of knocking about,
and can be sucked with impunity. From the first dawn of recollection,
children are thus familiarized with the forms of natural objects, and
may be well up in natural history before they have mastered the A B C.”

Parents often make Sunday a day of gloom: to this I much object. Of all
the days in the week, Sunday should be the most cheerful and pleasant.
It is considered by our Church a festival; and a glorious festival it
ought to be made, and one on which our Heavenly Father wishes to see all
His children happy and full of innocent joy! Let Sunday, then, be made a
cheerful, joyous, innocently happy day, and not, as it frequently is,
the most miserable and dismal in the week. It is my firm conviction that
many men have been made irreligious by the ridiculously strict and
dismal way they were compelled, as children, to spend their Sundays. You
can no more make children religious by gloomy asceticism, than you can
make people good by Act of Parliament!

One of the great follies of the present age is, children’s parties,
where they are allowed to be dressed like grown-up women, stuck out in
crinoline, and encouraged to eat rich cake and pastry, and to drink
wine, and to sit up late at night! There is something disgusting and
demoralizing in all this. Their pure minds are blighted by it. Do not
let me be misunderstood: there is not the least objection, but, on the
contrary, great advantage, for friends’ children to meet friends’
children; but then let them be treated as children, and not as men and
women!

178. _Do you approve of public play-grounds for children?_

It would be well, in every village, and in the outskirts of every town,
if a large plot of ground were set apart for children to play in, and to
go through regular gymnastic exercises. Play is absolutely necessary to
a child’s very existence, as much as food and sleep; but in many parts
of England where is he to have it? Play-grounds and play are the best
schools we have; they teach a great deal not taught elsewhere; they give
lessons in health, which is the grandest wealth that can be
bestowed—“for health is wealth;” they prepare the soil for the future
school-master; they clear the brain, and thus the intellect; they
strengthen the muscles; they make the blood course merrily through the
arteries; they bestow healthy food for the lungs; they give an appetite;
they make a child, in due time, become every inch a man! Play-grounds
and play are one of the finest Institutions we possess. What would our
large public schools be without their play and cricket-grounds? The
would be shorn of half their splendor and usefulness.

There is so much talk nowadays about _useful_ knowledge, that the
importance of play and play-grounds is likely to be forgotten. I cannot
help thinking, however, that a better state of things is dawning. “It
seems to be found out that in our zeal for useful knowledge, that
knowledge is found to be not the least useful which treats boys as
active, stirring, aspiring, and ready.”




                               EDUCATION.


179. _Do you approve of infant schools?_

I do, if the arrangements be such that health is preferred before
learning. “According to Aristotle, more care should be taken of the body
than of the mind for the first seven years; strict attention to diet be
enforced, etc.... The eye and ear of the child be most watchfully and
severely guarded against contamination of every kind, and unrestrained
communication with servants be strictly prevented. Even his amusements
should be under due regulation, and rendered as interesting and
intellectual as possible.” Let children be only confined for three or
four hours a day, and let what little they learn be taught as an
amusement rather than as a labor. A play-ground ought to be attached to
an infants’ school: where in fine weather, for every half hour they
spend in-doors, they should spend one in the open air; and, in wet
weather, they ought to have, in lieu of the play-ground, a large room to
romp, and shout, and riot in. To develop the different organs, muscles,
and other parts of the body, children require fresh air, a free use of
their lungs, active exercise, and their bodies to be thrown into all
manner of attitudes. Let a child mope in a corner, and he will become
stupid and sickly. The march of intellect, as it is called, or rather
the double quick march of intellect, as it should be called, has stolen
a march upon health. Only allow the march of intellect and the march of
health to take equal strides, and then we shall have “_mens sana in
corpore sano_” (a sound mind in a sound body).

In the education of a young child, it is better to instruct him by
illustration and by encouraging observation on things around and about
him, than by books. It is surprising how much, without endangering the
health, may be taught in this way. In educating your child, be careful
to instill and to form good habits—they will then stick to him for life.

Children at the present day are too highly educated—their brains are
overtaxed, and thus weakened. The consequence is, that as they grow up
to manhood, if they grow up at all, they become fools! _Children_ are
now taught what formerly _youths_ were taught. The chord of a child’s
life is ofttimes snapped asunder in consequence of overeducation:

            “Screw not the chord too sharply, lest it snap.”

You should treat a child as you would a young colt. Think only at first
of strengthening his body. Let him have a perfectly free, happy life,
plenty of food to eat, abundance of air to breathe, and no work to do;
there is plenty of time to think of his learning—of giving him brain
work. It will come sadly too soon; but do not make him old before his
time.

180. _At what age do you advise my child to begin his course of
education—to have his regular lessons?_

In the name of the prophet,—Figs! Fiddlesticks! about courses of
education and regular lessons for a child! You may as well ask me when
he, a child, is to begin Hebrew, the Sanscrit, and Mathematics! Let him
have a course of education in play; let him go through regular lessons
in football, bandy, playing at tic, hares and hounds, and such like
excellent and really useful and health-giving lessons. Begin his
lessons! Begin brain-work, and make an idiot of him! Oh! for shame, ye
mothers! You who pretend to love your children so much, and to tax,
otherwise to injure, irreparably to injure their brains, and thus their
intellects and their health, and to shorten their very days. And all for
what? To make prodigies of them! Forsooth! to make fools of them in the
end.

181. _Well, then, as you have such a great objection to a child
commencing his education early in life, at what age may he, with safety,
commence his lessons? and which do you prefer—home or school education?_

Home is far preferable to a school education for a child. If at home, he
is under your own _immediate_ observation, and is not liable to be
contaminated by naughty children; for, in every school, there is
necessarily a great mixture of the good and of the bad; and a child,
unfortunately, is more likely to be led by a bad than by a good child.

Moreover, if the child be educated at home, the mother can see that his
brain be not overworked. At school the brain is apt to be overworked,
and the stomach, and the muscles to be underworked.

Remember, as above stated, _the brain must have but very little work
until the child be seven years old_: impress this advice upon your
memory, and let no foolish ambition to make your child a clever child
allow you, for one moment, to swerve from this advice.

Build up a strong, healthy body, and in due time the brain will bear a
_moderate_ amount of intellectual labor.

As I have given _you_ so much advice, permit me, for one moment, to
address a word to the father of your child:

Let me advise _you_, then, Mr. _Paterfamilias_, to be careful how you
converse, what language you use, while in the company of your child.
Bear in mind, a child is very observant, and thinks much, weighs well,
and seldom forgets all you say and all you do! Let no hasty word, then,
and more especially no oath, or no impious language, ever pass your
lips, if your child is within hearing. It is, of course, at all times
wicked to swear; but it is heinously and unpardonably sinful to swear in
the presence of your child! “Childhood is like a mirror, catching and
reflecting images. One impious or profane thought, uttered by a parent’s
lip, may operate upon the young heart like a careless spray of water
thrown upon polished steel, staining it with rust, which no
after-scouring can efface.”

Never talk secrets before a child—“little pitchers have long ears;” if
you do, and he discloses your secrets,—as most likely he will,—and thus
make mischief, it will be cruel to scold him; you will, for your
imprudence, have yourself only to blame. Be most careful, then, in the
presence of your child, of what you say and of whom you speak. This
advice, if followed, might save a great deal of annoyance and vexation.

182. _Are you an advocate for a child being taught singing?_

I am; I consider singing a part of a child’s education. Singing expands
the walls of the chest, strengthens and invigorates the lungs, gives
sweetness to the voice, improves the pronunciation, and is a great
pleasure and amusement to a child.




                                 SLEEP.


183. _Do you approve of a child sleeping on a_ FEATHER _bed_?

A _feather_ bed enervates his body, and, if he be so predisposed, causes
rickets, and makes him crooked. A horse-hair mattress is the best for a
child to lie on. The pillow, too, should be made of horse-hair. A
_feather_ pillow often causes the head to be bathed in perspiration,
thus enervating the child and making him liable to catch cold. If he be
at all rickety, if he be weak in the neck, if he be inclined to stoop,
or if he be at all crooked, let him, by all means, lie without a pillow.

184. _Do you recommend a child, in the middle of the day, to be put to
sleep?_

Let him be put on his mattress _awake_ at twelve o’clock, that he may
sleep for an hour or two before dinner, then he will rise both refreshed
and strengthened for the remainder of the day. I said, let him be put
down _awake_. He might, for the first few times, cry; but, by
perseverance, he will without any difficulty fall to sleep. The practice
of sleeping before dinner ought to be continued until he be two years
old, and if he can be prevailed upon, even longer. For if he do not have
sleep in the middle of the day, he will all the afternoon and the
evening be cross; and when he does go to bed, he will probably be too
tired to sleep, or his nerves, having been exhausted by the long
wakefulness, he will fall into a troubled, broken slumber, and not into
that sweet, soft, gentle repose, so characteristic of healthy, happy
childhood!

185. _At what hour ought a child to be put to bed in the evening?_

At six in the winter, and at seven o’clock in the summer. _Regularity_
ought to be observed, as _regularity is very conducive to health_. It is
a reprehensible practice to keep a child up until nine or ten o’clock at
night. If this be done, he will, before his time, become old, and the
seeds of disease will be sown.

As soon as he can run, let him be encouraged, for half an hour before he
goes to bed, to race either about the hall, or the landing, or a large
room, which will be the best means of warming his feet, of preventing
chilblains, and of making him sleep soundly.

186. _Have you any directions to give me as to the placing of my child
in his bed?_

If a child lie alone, place him fairly on his side in the middle of the
bed; if it be winter time, see that his arms and hands be covered with
the bedclothes; if it be summer, his hands might be allowed to be
outside the clothes.

In putting him down to sleep, you should ascertain that his face be not
covered with the bedclothes; if it be, he will be poisoned with his own
breath—the breath constantly giving off carbonic acid gas; which gas
must, if his face be smothered in the clothes, be breathed—carbonic acid
gas being highly poisonous.

You can readily prove the existence of carbonic acid gas in the
breathing, by simply breathing into a little lime-water; after breathing
for a few seconds into it, a white film will form on the top; the
carbonic acid gas from the breath unites with the lime of the
lime-water, and the product of the white film is carbonate of lime.

187. _Do you advise a bed-room to be darkened at night?_

Certainly. A child sleeps sounder and sweeter in a dark than in a light
room. There is nothing better, for the purpose of darkening a bed-room,
than Venetian blinds.

Remember, then, a well-ventilated, but a darkened chamber at night. The
cot or the crib ought _not_ to face the window, “as the light is best
behind.” [Sir Charles Locock in a _Letter_ to the Author.]

188. _Which is the best position for a child when sleeping—on his back,
or on his side?_

His side. He ought to be accustomed to change about—on the right side
one night, on the left another; and occasionally, for a change, he
should lie on his back. By adopting this plan you will not only improve
his figure, but likewise his health. Lying, night after night, in one
position, would be likely to make him crooked.

189. _Do you advise, in the winter time, that there should be a fire in
the night nursery?_

Certainly not, unless the weather be intensely cold. I dislike fires in
bed-rooms, especially for children; they are very enervating, and make a
child liable to catch cold. Cold weather is very bracing, particularly
at night. “Generally speaking,” says the _Siecle_, “during winter,
apartments are too much heated. The temperature in them ought not to
exceed 16° Centigrade (59° Fahrenheit); and even in periods of great
cold, scientific men declare that 12° or 14° had better not be exceeded.
In the wards of hospitals, and in the chambers of the sick, care is
taken not to have greater heat than 15°. Clerks in offices, and other
persons of sedentary occupations, when the rooms in which they sit are
too much heated, are liable to cerebral [brain] congestion and to
pulmonary [lung] complaints. In bed-rooms, and particularly those of
children, the temperature ought to be maintained rather low; it is even
prudent only rarely to make fires in them, especially during the night.”

“If a cold stable make a healthy horse,” I am quite sure that a
moderately cold and well-ventilated bed-room helps to make a healthy
child. But still, in the winter time, if the weather be biting cold, a
_little_ fire in the bed-room grate is desirable. In bringing up
children, we must never run into extremes—the coddling system and the
hardening system are both to be deprecated; the coddling system will
make a strong child weakly, while the hardening system will probably
kill a delicate one.

A child’s bed ought, of course, to be comfortably clothed with
blankets—I say blankets, as they are much superior to coverlids; the
perspiration will more readily pass through a blanket than a coverlid. A
_thick_ coverlid ought never to be used; there is nothing better for a
child’s bed than the old-fashioned patch-work coverlid, as the
perspiration will easily escape through it.

190. _Should a child be washed and dressed_ AS SOON AS HE AWAKES _in the
morning?_

He ought, if he awakes in anything like reasonable time; for if he doze
after he be once awake, such slumber does him more harm than good. He
should be up every morning as soon as it is light. If, as a child, he be
taught to rise early, it will make him an early riser for life, and will
tend greatly to prolong both his existence and his happiness.

_Never awake a child from his sleep_ to dress him, to give him medicine,
or for any other purpose; _let him always sleep as long as he can_; but
the moment he awakes let him be held out, and then let him be washed and
dressed, and do not wait, as many a silly nurse does, until he has wet
his bed, until his blood be chilled, and until he be cross, miserable,
and uncomfortable! How many babies are made ill by such foolish
practices!

The moment he leaves his bed, turn back to the fullest extent the
clothes, in order that they may be thoroughly ventilated and sweetened.
They ought to be exposed to the air for at least an hour before the bed
be made. As soon as he leaves his room, be it winter or summer, throw
open the windows.

191. _Ought a child to lie alone?_

He should after he is weaned. He will rest more comfortably, and his
sleep will be more refreshing.

192. _Supposing a child should not sleep well, what ought to be done?
Would you give him a dose of composing medicine?_

Certainly not. Try the effect of exercise. Exercise in the open air is
the best composing medicine in the world. Let the little fellow be well
tired out, and there will be little fear of his not sleeping.

193. _Have you any further observations to make on the subject of
sleep?_

Send a child joyful to bed. Do not, if you can possibly help it, let him
go to bed crying. Let the last impressions he has at night be of his
happy home, and of his loving father and mother, and let his last
thoughts be those of joy and gladness. He will sleep all the sounder if
he be sent to bed in such a frame of mind, and he will be more refreshed
and nourished in the morning by his sleep.

194. _What is the usual cause of a child walking in his sleep, and what
measures, during such times, ought to be adopted to prevent his injuring
himself?_

A disordered stomach in a child of nervous temperament is usually the
cause. The means to be adopted to prevent his throwing himself out of
the window are to have bars to his chamber casement, and if that be not
practicable, to have either nails or screws driven into the window-sash
to allow the window to open only for a sufficient space for ventilation,
and to have a screw window-fastening, in order that he cannot, without
difficulty, open the window; to have a trusty person to sleep in his
room, who should have directions given not to rouse him from his sleep,
but to gently lead him back to his bed, which may frequently be done
without awaking him; and to consult a medical man, who will adopt means
to put his stomach into order, to brace his nerves, and to strengthen
his general system. A trip to the coast and sea bathing, in such a case,
is often of great service.




                           SECOND DENTITION.


195. _When does a child begin to cut his_ SECOND _set of teeth_?

Generally at seven years old. He _begins_ to _cut_ them at about that
time; but it should be borne in mind (so wonderful are the works of God)
that the _second_ crop of teeth _in embryo_ is actually bred and formed
from the very commencement of his life, _under_ the first tier of teeth,
but which remain in abeyance for years, and do not come into play until
the _first_ teeth, having done their duty, loosen and fall out, and thus
make room for _the_ more numerous, larger, stronger, and more permanent
teeth, which latter have to last for the remainder of his existence. The
_first_ set is sometimes cut with a great deal of difficulty, and
produces various disease; the _second_, or permanent teeth, come easily,
and are unaccompanied with any disorder. The following is the process:
one after another of the _first_ set gradually loosen, and either drop
out, or with little pain are readily pulled out; under these, the
_second_—the permanent teeth—make their appearance, and fill up the
vacant spaces. The fang of the tooth that has dropped out is nearly all
absorbed or eaten away, leaving little more than the crown. The _first_
set consists of twenty; the _second_ (including the wise teeth, which
are not generally cut until after the age of twenty-seven) consists of
thirty-two.

I would recommend you to pay particular attention to the teeth of your
children; for, besides their being ornamental, their regularity and
soundness are of great importance to the present as well as to the
future health of your offspring. If there be any irregularity in the
appearance of the _second_ set, lose no time in consulting an
experienced and respectable dentist.




                             DISEASE, ETC.


196. _Do you think it important that I should be made acquainted with
the symptoms of the_ SERIOUS _diseases of children_?

Certainly. I am not advocating the doctrine of a mother _treating
serious_ diseases; far from it; it is not her province, except in
certain cases of extreme urgency where a medical man cannot be procured,
and where delay might be death; but I do insist upon the necessity of
her knowing the _symptoms_ of disease. My belief is, that if parents
were better informed on such subjects, many children’s lives might be
saved, much suffering might be averted, and much sorrow might be spared.
The fact is, the knowledge of the symptoms of disease is, to a mother,
almost a sealed book. If she were better acquainted with these matters,
how much more useful would she be in a sick-room, and how much more
readily would she enter into the plans and views of the medical man! By
her knowledge of the symptoms, and by having his advice in time, she
would nip disease in the bud, and the fight might end in favor of life,
for “sickness is just a fight between life and death.”

It is really lamentable to contemplate the amount of ignorance that
still exists among mothers in all that appertains to the diseases of
children; although, fortunately, they are beginning to see and to feel
the importance of gaining instruction on such subjects; but the light is
only dawning. A writer of the present day makes the following remarks,
which somewhat bear on the subject in question. He observes: “In spite
of the knowledge and clear views possessed by the profession on all that
concerns the management of children, no fact is more palpable than that
the most grievous ignorance and incompetency prevail respecting it among
the public. We want some means of making popular the knowledge which is
now almost restricted to medical men, or at most, to the well-educated
classes.”

In the earlier editions of this work, I did not give the _treatment_ of
any serious diseases, however urgent. In the three last editions I have
been induced, for reasons I will presently state, to give the
_treatment_ of some of the more urgent _serious_ diseases, when a
medical man cannot instantly be procured, and where delay might be
death.

Sir Charles Locock, who has taken a kind interest in this little work,
has given me valid reasons why a mother should be so enlightened. The
following extracts are from a letter which I received from Sir Charles
on the subject, and which he has courteously allowed me to publish. He
says: “As an old physician of some experience in complaints of infants
and children, I may perhaps be allowed to suggest that in a future
edition you should add a few words on the actual treatment of some of
the more urgent infantile diseases. It is very right to caution parents
against superseding the doctor, and attempting to manage serious illness
themselves; but your advice, with very small exceptions, always being to
‘to lose no time in sending for a medical man,’ much valuable and often
irremediable time may be lost _when a medical man is not to be had_.
Take, for instance, a case of croup: there are no directions given at
all, except to send for a medical man, and always to keep medicines in
the house which he may have directed. But how can this apply to a first
attack? You state that a first attack is generally the worst. But why is
it so? Simply because it often occurs when the parents do not recognize
it, and it is allowed to get to a worse point than in subsequent
attacks, when they are thoroughly alive to it. As the very best remedy,
and often the only essential one, if given early, is a full emetic,
surely it is better that you should give some directions as to this in a
future edition, and I can speak from my own experience when I say that
an emetic, _given in time_, and repeated to free vomiting, will cut
short any case of croup. In nine cases out of ten the attack takes place
in the evening or early night, and when vomiting is effected the dinner
of that day is brought up nearly undigested, and the severity of the
symptoms at once cut short. Whenever any remedy is valuable, the more by
its being administered _in time_, it is surely wiser to give directions
as to its use, although, as a general rule, it is much better to advise
the sending for medical advice.”

The above reasons, coming from such a learned and experienced physician
as Sir Charles Locock, are conclusive, and have decided me to comply
with his advice, to enlighten a mother on the _treatment_ of some of the
more urgent diseases of infants and of children.

In a subsequent letter addressed to myself, Sir Charles has given me the
names of those _urgent_ diseases which he considers may be treated by a
mother, “where a medical man cannot be procured quickly, or not at all;”
they are—Croup; Inflammation of the Lungs; Diphtheria; Dysentery;
Diarrhœa; Hooping-Cough, in its various stages; and Shivering Fit. Sir
Charles sums up his letter to me by saying: “Such a book ought to be
made as complete as possible, and the objections to medical treatment
being so explained as to induce mothers to try to avoid medical men is
not so serious as that of leaving them without any guide in those
instances where every delay is dangerous, and yet where medical
assistance is not to be obtained or not to be had quickly.”

In addition to the above, I shall give you the _treatment_ of
Bronchitis, Measles, and Scarlet Fever. Bronchitis is one of the most
common diseases incidental to childhood, and, with judicious treatment,
is, in the absence of the medical man, readily managed by a sensible
mother. Measles is very submissive to treatment. Scarlet Fever, _if it
be not malignant_, and if certain rules be strictly followed, is also
equally amenable to treatment.

I have been fortunate in treating Scarlet Fever, and therefore think it
desirable to enter fully into the _treatment_ of a disease, which is
looked upon by many parents, and according to the usual mode of
treatment, with just cause, with great consternation and dread. By
giving my plan of treatment fully and simply, and without the slightest
reservation, I am fully persuaded, through God’s blessing, that I may be
the humble means of saving the lives of numbers of children.

The diseases that might be treated by a mother, in the absence of a
medical man, will form the subject of future Conversations.

197. _At what age does Water on the Brain usually occur, and how is a
mother to know that her child is about to labor under that disease?_

Water on the brain is, as a rule, a disease of childhood; after a child
is seven years old it is comparatively rare. It more frequently attacks
delicate children—children who have been dry-nursed (especially if they
have been improperly fed), or who have been suckled too long, or who
have had consumptive mothers, or who have suffered severely from
teething, or who are naturally of a feeble constitution. Water on the
brain sometimes follows an attack of inflammation of the lungs, more
especially if depressing measures (such as excessive leeching and the
administration of emetic tartar) have been adopted. It occasionally
follows in the train of contagious eruptive diseases, such as either
small-pox or scarlatina. We may divide the symptoms of water on the
brain into two stages. The first—the premonitory stage—which lasts four
or five days, in which medical aid might be of great avail; the
second—the stage of drowsiness and of coma—which usually ends in death.

I shall dwell on the first—the premonitory stage—in order that a mother
may see the importance without loss of time of calling in a medical man:

If her child be feverish and irritable, if his stomach be disordered, if
he have urgent vomitings, if he have a foul breath, if his appetite be
capricious and bad, if his nights be disturbed (screaming out in his
sleep), if his bowels be disordered, more especially if they be
constipated, if he be more than usually excited, if his eye gleam with
unusual brilliancy, if his tongue run faster than it is wont, if his
cheek be flushed and his head be hot, and if he be constantly putting
his hand to his head, there is cause for suspicion. If to these symptoms
be added, a more than usual carelessness in tumbling about, in hitching
his foot in the carpet, or in dragging one foot after the other; if,
too, he has complained of darting, shooting, lancinating pains in his
head, it may then be known that the _first_ stage of inflammation (the
forerunner of water on the brain) either has taken or is about taking
place. Remember, no time ought to be lost in obtaining medical aid; for
the _commencement_ of the disease is the golden opportunity, when life
might probably be saved.

198. _At what age, and in what neighborhood, is a child most liable to
Croup, and when is a mother to know that it is about to take place?_

It is unusual for a child until he be twelve months old to have croup;
but, from that time until the age of two years, he is more liable to it
than at any other period. The liability after two years gradually, until
he be ten years old, lessens, after which time it is rare.

A child is more liable to croup in a low and damp, than in a high and
dry neighborhood; indeed, in some situations, croup is almost an unknown
disease; while in others it is only too well understood. Croup is more
likely to prevail when the wind is either easterly or northeasterly.

There is no disease that requires more prompt treatment than croup, and
none that creeps on more insidiously. The child at first seems to be
laboring under a slight cold, and is troubled with a little _dry_ cough;
he is hot and fretful, and _hoarse_ when he cries. Hoarseness is one of
the earliest symptoms of croup; and it should be borne in mind that a
young child, unless he be going to have croup, is seldom hoarse; if,
therefore, your child be hoarse, he should be carefully watched, in
order that, as soon as croup be detected, not a moment be lost in
applying the proper remedies.

His voice at length becomes gruff, he breathes as though it were through
muslin, and the cough becomes crowing. These three symptoms prove that
the disease is now fully formed. These latter symptoms sometimes come on
without any previous warning, the little fellow going to bed apparently
quite well, until the mother is awakened, perplexed, and frightened, in
the middle of the night, by finding him laboring under the
characteristic cough and the other symptoms of croup. If she delay
either to send for assistance, _or if proper medicines be not instantly
given_, in a few hours it will probably be of no avail, and in a day or
two the little sufferer will be a corpse!

When once a child has had croup the after-attacks are generally milder.
If he has once had an attack of croup, I should advise you always to
have in the house medicine—a 4 oz. bottle of ipecacuanha wine, to fly to
at a moment’s notice; but never omit, where practicable, in a case of
croup, whether the attack be severe or mild, to send _immediately_ for
medical aid. In case of a sudden attack of croup, _instantly_ give a
teaspoonful of ipecacuanha wine, and repeat it every five minutes until
free vomiting be excited. There is no disease in which time is more
precious than in croup, and where the delay of an hour may decide either
for life or for death.

199. _But suppose a medical man is not_ IMMEDIATELY _to be procured,
what then am I to do? more especially, as you say, that delay might be
death_.

_What to do._—I never in my life lost a child with croup where I was
called in at the _commencement_ of the disease, and where my plans were
carried out to the very letter. Let me begin by saying, Look well to the
goodness and purity of the medicine, for the life of your child may
depend upon the medicine being genuine. What medicine? _Ipecacuanha
wine!_ At the earliest dawn of the disease give a teaspoonful of
ipecacuanha wine every five minutes, until free vomiting be excited. In
croup, before he is safe, free vomiting _must_ be established, and that
without loss of time. If, after the expiration of an hour, the
ipecacuanha wine (having given during that hour a teaspoonful of it
every five minutes) is not sufficiently powerful for the
purpose—although it generally is so (if the ipecacuanha wine be
good)—then let the following mixture be substituted:

[Illustration: CHILDHOOD—STRAYED FROM HOME.]

           Take of—Powdered Ipecacuanha, one scruple;
                    Wine of Ipecacuanha, one ounce and a half:

  Make a Mixture. A teaspoonful to be given every five minutes, until
  free vomiting be excited, first _well_ shaking the bottle.

After the vomiting, place the child for a quarter of an hour in a warm
bath. (See “Warm baths”—directions and precautions to be observed.) When
out of the bath give him small doses of ipecacuanha wine every two or
three hours. The following is a palatable form for the mixture:

               Take of—Wine of Ipecacuanha, three drachms;
                        Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                        Water, six drachms:

  Make a Mixture. A teaspoonful to be taken every two or three hours.

But remember, the emetic which is given at _first_ is _pure ipecacuanha
wine, without a drop of either water or of syrup_.

A large sponge dipped out of very hot water, and applied to the throat,
and frequently renewed, oftentimes affords great relief in croup, and
ought during the time the emetic is being administered in all cases to
be adopted.

If it be a _severe_ case of croup, and does not in the course of two
hours yield to the free exhibition of the ipecacuanha emetic, apply a
narrow strip of _Smith’s tela vesicatoria_ to the throat, prepared in
the same way as for a case of inflammation of the lungs (see the
Conversation on the _treatment_ of inflammation of the lungs). With this
only difference, let it be a narrower strip, only one-half the width
there recommended, and apply it to the throat instead of to the chest.
If a child has a very short, fat neck, there may not be room for the
_tela_, then you ought to apply it to the _upper_ part of the chest—just
under the collar-bones.

Let it be understood that the _tela vesicatoria_ is not a severe remedy,
that the _tela_ produces very little pain—not nearly so much as the
application of leeches; although, in its action, it is much more
beneficial, and is not nearly so weakening to the system.

Keep the child from all stimulants; let him live on a low diet, such as
milk and water, toast and water, arrow-root, etc.; and let the room be,
if practicable, at a temperate heat—60° Fahrenheit, and be well
ventilated.

So you see that the _treatment_ of croup is very simple, and that the
plan might be carried out by an intelligent mother. Notwithstanding
which, it is your duty, where practicable, to send at the very _onset_
of the disease for a medical man.

Let me again reiterate that if your child is to be saved the
_ipecacuanha wine must be genuine and good_. This can only be effected
by having the medicine from a highly respectable chemist. Again, if ever
your child has had croup, let me again urge you _always_ to have in the
house a 4 oz. bottle of ipecacuanha wine, that you may resort to at a
moment’s notice in case there be the slightest return of the disease.

Ipecacuanha wine, unfortunately, is not a medicine that keeps well;
therefore, every three or four months a fresh bottle ought to be
procured either from a medical man or from a chemist. As long as the
ipecacuanha wine remains _clear_, it is good; but as soon as it becomes
_turbid_ it is bad, and ought to be replaced by a fresh supply.

An intelligent correspondent of mine makes the following valuable
remarks on the preservation of ipecacuanha wine: “Now, I know that there
are some medicines and chemical preparations which, though they spoil
rapidly when at all exposed to the air, yet will keep perfectly good for
an indefinite time if hermetically sealed up in a _perfectly full_
bottle. If so, would it not be a valuable suggestion if the
Apothecaries’ Hall, or some other London firm of _undoubted_
reliability, would put up 1 oz. phials of ipecacuanha wine of guaranteed
purity, sealed up so as to keep good so long as unopened, and sent out
in sealed packages, with the guarantee of their name. By keeping a few
such ounce bottles in an unopened state in one’s house, one might rely
on being ready for any emergency. If you think this suggestion worth
notice, and could induce some first-rate house to carry it out, and
mention the fact in a subsequent edition of your book, you would, I
think, be adding another most valuable item to an already invaluable
book.”

The above suggestion of preserving ipecacuanha wine in ounce bottles,
quite full, and hermetically sealed, is a very good one. The best way of
hermetically sealing the bottle would be to cut the cork level with the
lip of the bottle, and to cover the cork with sealing-wax, in the same
manner wine merchants serve some kinds of their wines, and then to lay
the bottles on their sides in sawdust in the cellar. I have no doubt, if
such a plan were adopted, the ipecacuanha wine would for a length of
time keep good. Of course, if the wine of ipecacuanha be procured from
the Apothecaries’ Hall Company, London (as suggested by my
correspondent), there can be no question as to the genuineness of the
article.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not give emetic tartar; do not apply leeches; do
not keep the room very warm; do not give stimulants; do not omit to have
always in the house either a 4 oz. bottle, or three or four 1 oz.
bottles of ipecacuanha wine.

200. _I have heard Child-crowing mentioned as a formidable disease;
would you describe the symptoms?_

Child-crowing, or _spurious croup_, as it is sometimes called, is
occasionally mistaken for _genuine croup_. It is a more frequent
disorder than the latter, and requires a different plan of treatment.
Child-crowing is a disease that almost invariably occurs only during
dentition, and is _most perilous_. But if a child laboring under it can
fortunately escape suffocation until he has cut the whole of his first
set of teeth—twenty—he is then, as a rule, safe.

Child-crowing comes on in paroxysms. The breathing during the intervals
is quite natural—indeed, the child appears perfectly well; hence the
dangerous nature of the disease is either overlooked, or is lightly
thought of, until perhaps a paroxysm worse than common takes place, and
the little patient dies of suffocation, overwhelming the mother with
terror, with confusion, and dismay.

The _symptoms_ in a paroxysm of child-crowing are as follows: The child
suddenly loses and fights for his breath, and in doing so makes a noise
very much like that of crowing; hence the name child-crowing. The face
during the paroxysm becomes bluish or livid. In a favorable case, after
either a few seconds, or even, in some instances, a minute, and a
frightful struggle to breathe, he regains his breath, and is, until
another paroxysm occurs, perfectly well. In an unfavorable case, the
upper part (chink) of the windpipe remains for a minute or two closed,
and the child, not being able to breath, drops a corpse in his nurse’s
arms. Many children, who are said to have died of fits, have really died
of child-crowing.

I have entered thus rather fully into the subject, as many lives might
be saved if a mother knew the nature of the complaint, and the _great
necessity, during the paroxysms, of prompt and proper measures_. For,
too frequently, before a medical man has had time to arrive, the child
has breathed his last, the parent herself being perfectly ignorant of
the necessary treatment; hence the vital importance of the subject, and
the paramount necessity of imparting information, in a _popular_ style,
in a work of this kind.

201. _What treatment, then, during a paroxysm of Child-crowing should
you advise?_

The first thing, of course, to be done is to send _immediately_ for a
medical man. Have a plentiful supply of cold and of hot water always at
hand, ready at a moment’s notice for use. The instant the paroxysm is
upon the child, plentifully and perseveringly dash _cold_ water upon his
head and face. Put his feet and legs in _hot_ salt, mustard, and water;
and, if necessary, place him up to his neck in a hot bath, still dashing
water upon his face and head. If he does not quickly come round, sharply
smack his back and buttocks.

As soon as a medical man arrives, he will lose no time in thoroughly
lancing the gums and in applying other appropriate remedies.

Great care and attention ought, during the intervals, to be paid to the
diet. If the child is breathing a smoky, close atmosphere, he should be
immediately removed to a pure one. In this disease, indeed, there is no
remedy equal to a change of air—to a dry, bracing neighborhood. Change
of air, even if it be winter, is the best remedy, either to the coast or
to a healthy farm-house. I am indebted to Mr. Roberton, of Manchester
(who has paid great attention to this disease, and who has written a
valuable essay on the subject), for the knowledge of this fact. Where,
in a case of this kind, it is not practicable to send a child _from_
home, then let him be sent out of doors the greater part of every day;
let him, in point of fact, almost live in the open air. I am quite sure,
from an extensive experience, that in this disease, fresh air, and
plenty of it, is the best and principal remedy.

202. _When is a mother to know that a cough is not a “tooth-cough,” but
one of the symptoms of Inflammation of the Lungs?_

If the child has had a shivering fit; if his skin be very hot and very
dry; if his lips be parched; if there be great thirst; if his cheeks be
flushed; if he be dull and heavy, wishing to be quiet in his cot or
crib; if his appetite be diminished; if his tongue be furred; if his
mouth be _burning_ hot and dry; if his urine be scanty and high-colored,
staining the napkin or the linen; _if his breathing be short, panting,
hurried, and oppressed; if there be a hard, dry cough; and if his skin
be burning hot_; then there is no doubt that inflammation of the lungs
has taken place. If you put your finger into the mouth of a child
laboring under inflammation of the lungs, it is like putting your finger
into a hot apple-pie, the heat is _so_ great.

No time should be lost in sending for medical aid; indeed, the _hot, dry
mouth and skin, and short hurried breathing_ would be sufficient cause
for your procuring _immediate_ assistance. If inflammation of the lungs
were properly treated at the _onset_, a child would scarcely ever be
lost by that disease. I say this advisedly, for in my own practice,
_provided I am called in early, and if my plans are strictly carried
out_, I scarcely ever lose a child from inflammation of the lungs.

You may ask—What are your plans? I will tell you, in case _you cannot
promptly obtain medical advice_, as delay might be death.

_The treatment of Inflammation of the Lungs, what to do._—Keep the child
to one room, to his bed-room, and to his bed. Let the chamber be
properly ventilated. If the weather be cool, let a small fire be in the
grate; otherwise, he is better without a fire. Let him live on low diet,
such as weak black tea, milk and water, and toast and water, thin
oatmeal gruel, arrow-root, and such like simple beverages, and give him
the following mixture:

               Take of—Wine of Ipecacuanha, three drachms;
                        Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                        Water, six drachms:

  Make a Mixture. A teaspoonful of the mixture to be taken every four
  hours.

Be careful that you go to a respectable chemist, in order _that the
quality of the ipecacuanha wine may be good, as the child’s life may
depend upon it_.

If the medicine produces sickness, so much the better; continue it
regularly until the short, oppressed, and hurried breathing has
subsided, and has become natural.

If the attack be very severe, in addition to the above medicine, at once
apply a blister, not the common blister, but _Smith’s tela
vesicatoria_—a quarter of a sheet, which ought to be fastened on to a
piece of sticking-plaster, taking care to apply the tela vesicatoria
(which is on paper) to the warmed plaster, so as to securely fasten the
tela vesicatoria on the sticking-plaster. The plaster should be rather
larger than the blister, so as to leave a margin. Any respectable
chemist will understand the above directions, and will prepare the tela
ready for use. If the child be a year old, the blister ought to be kept
on for three hours, and then a piece of dry, soft linen rag should be
applied for another three hours. At the end of which time—six
hours—there will be a beautiful blister, which must then, with a pair of
scissors, be cut, to let out the water; and then let the blister be
dressed, night and morning, with simple cerate spread on lint.

If the little patient be more than one year, say two years old, let the
tela remain on for five hours, and the dry linen rag for five hours
more, before the blister, as above recommended, be cut and dressed.

If in a day or two the inflammation still continue violent, let another
tela vesicatoria be applied, not over the old blister, but let a narrow
slip of it, on sticking-plaster, be applied on each side of the old
blister, and managed in the same manner as before directed.

_I cannot speak too highly of Smith’s tela vesicatoria._ It has, in my
hands, through God’s blessing, saved the lives of scores of children. It
is far, very far superior to the old-fashioned blistering plaster. It
seldom, if the above rules be strictly observed, fails to rise; it gives
much less pain than the common blister; when it has had the desired
effect, it readily heals, which cannot always be said of the common
fly-blister, more especially with children.

My sheet-anchors, then, in the inflammation of the lungs of children,
are, ipecacuanha wine and Smith’s _tela vesicatoria_. Let the greatest
care, as I before advised, be observed in obtaining the ipecacuanha wine
genuine and good. This can only be depended upon by having the medicine
from a highly respectable chemist. Ipecacuanha wine, when genuine and
good, is, in many children’s diseases, one of the most valuable of
medicines.

_What, in a case of Inflammation of the Lungs_ NOT _to do_.—Do not, on
any account, apply leeches. They draw out the life of the child, but not
his disease. Avoid—_emphatically let me say so_—giving emetic tartar. It
is one of the most lowering and death-dealing medicines that can be
administered either to an infant or to a child! If you wish to try the
effect of it, take a dose yourself, and I am quite sure that you will
then never be inclined to poison a baby with such an abominable
preparation! In olden times—many, many years ago—I myself gave it in
inflammation of the lungs, and lost many children! Since leaving it off,
the recoveries of patients by the ipecacuanha treatment, combined with
the external application of Smith’s _tela vesicatoria_, have been in
many cases marvelous. Avoid broths and wine, and all stimulants. Do
_not_ put the child into a warm bath, it only oppresses the already
oppressed breathing. Moreover, after he is out of the bath, it causes a
larger quantity of blood to rush back to the lungs and to the bronchial
tubes, and thus feeds the inflammation. Do not, by a large fire, keep
the temperature of the room high. A small fire, in the winter time,
encourages ventilation, and in such a case does good. When the little
patient is on the mother’s or on the nurse’s lap, do not burden him
either with a _heavy_ blanket or with a _thick_ shawl. Either a child’s
_thin_ blanket, or a thin _woolen_ shawl, in addition to his usual
night-gown, is all the clothing necessary.

203. _Is Bronchitis a more frequent disease than Inflammation of the
Lungs? Which is the most dangerous? What are the symptoms of
Bronchitis?_

Bronchitis is a much more frequent disease than inflammation of the
lungs; indeed, it is one of the most common complaints both of infants
and of children, while inflammation of the lungs is comparatively a rare
disease. Bronchitis is not nearly such a dangerous disease as
inflammation of the lungs.

_The symptoms._—The child for the first few days labors under symptoms
of a heavy cold; he has not his usual spirits. In two or three days,
instead of the cold leaving him, it becomes more confirmed; he is now
really poorly, fretful, and feverish; his breathing becomes rather
hurried and oppressed; his cough is hard and dry and loud; he wheezes,
and if you put your ear to his naked back, between his shoulder-blades,
you will hear the wheezing more distinctly. If at the breast, he does
not suck with his usual avidity; the cough, notwithstanding the breast
is a great comfort to him, compels him frequently to loose the nipple;
his urine is scanty, and rather high-colored, staining the napkin, and
smelling strongly. He is generally worse at night.

Well, then, remember if the child be feverish, if he have symptoms of a
heavy cold, or he have an oppression of breathing, if he wheeze, and if
he have a tight, dry, noisy cough, you may be satisfied that he has an
attack of bronchitis.

204. _How can I distinguish between Bronchitis and Inflammation of the
Lungs?_

In bronchitis the skin is warm but moist; in inflammation of the lungs
it is hot and dry: in bronchitis the mouth is warmer than usual, but
moist; in inflammation of the lungs it is burning hot: in bronchitis the
breathing is rather hurried, and attended with wheezing; in inflammation
of the lungs it is very short and panting, and is unaccompanied with
wheezing, although occasionally a very slight crackling sound might be
heard: in bronchitis the cough is long and noisy; in inflammation of the
lungs it is short and feeble: in bronchitis the child is cross and
fretful; in inflammation of the lungs he is dull and heavy, and his
countenance denotes distress.

We have sometimes a combination of bronchitis and of inflammation of the
lungs, an attack of the latter following the former. Then the symptoms
will be modified, and will partake of the character of the two diseases.

205. _How would you treat a case of Bronchitis?_

If a medical man cannot be procured, I will tell you _what to do_:
Confine the child to his bed-room, and if very ill, to his bed. If it be
winter time, have a little fire in the grate, but be sure that the
temperature of the chamber is not above 60° Fahrenheit, and let the room
be properly ventilated, which may be effected by occasionally leaving
the door a little ajar.

Let him lie either _outside_ the bed or on a sofa; if he be very ill,
_inside_ the bed, with a sheet and a blanket only to cover him, but no
thick coverlid. If he be allowed to lie on the lap, it only heats him
and makes him restless. If he will not lie on the bed, let him rest on a
pillow placed on the lap; the pillow will cause him to lie cooler, and
will more comfortably rest his wearied body. If he be at the breast,
keep him to it; let him have no artificial food, unless, if he be
thirsty, a little toast and water. If he be weaned, let him have either
milk and water, arrow-root made with equal parts of milk and water,
toast and water, barley-water, or weak black tea, with plenty of new
milk in it, etc.; but, until the inflammation has subsided, neither
broth nor beef-tea.

Now, with regard to medicine, the best medicine is ipecacuanha wine,
given in large doses, so as to produce constant nausea. The ipecacuanha
abates fever, acts on the skin, loosens the cough, and, in point of
fact, in the majority of cases will rapidly effect a cure. I have in a
preceding Conversation given you a prescription for the ipecacuanha wine
mixture. Let a teaspoonful of the mixture be taken every four hours.

If in a day or two he be no better, but worse, by all means continue the
mixture, whether it produce sickness or otherwise; and put on the chest
a _tela vesicatoria_, prepared and applied as I recommended when
treating of inflammation of the lungs.

The ipecacuanha wine and the tela vesicatoria are my sheet-anchors in
the bronchitis, both of infants and of children. They rarely, even in
very severe cases, fail to effect a cure, provided the tela vesicatoria
be properly applied, and the ipecacuanha wine be genuine and of good
quality.

If there be any difficulty in procuring _good_ ipecacuanha wine, the
ipecacuanha may be given in powder instead of the wine. The following is
a pleasant form:

              Take of—Powder of Ipecacuanha, twelve grains;
                       White Sugar, thirty-six grains:

  Mix well together, and divide into twelve powders. One of the powders
  to be put dry on the tongue every four hours.

The ipecacuanha powder will keep better than the wine, an important
consideration to those living in country places; nevertheless, if the
wine can be procured fresh and good, I far prefer the wine to the
powder.

When the bronchitis has disappeared, the diet ought gradually to be
improved—rice, sago, tapioca, and light batter-pudding, etc.; and in a
few days, either a little chicken or a mutton-chop, mixed with a
well-mashed potato and crumb of bread, should be given. But let the
improvement in his diet be gradual, or the inflammation might return.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not apply leeches. Do not give either emetic
tartar, or antimonial wine, which is emetic tartar dissolved in wine. Do
not administer either paregoric or syrup of poppies, either of which
would stop the cough, and would thus prevent the expulsion of the
phlegm. Any fool can stop a cough, but it requires a wise man to rectify
the mischief. A cough is an effort of nature to bring up the phlegm,
which would otherwise accumulate, and in the end cause death. Again,
therefore, let me urge upon you the immense importance of _not_ stopping
the cough of a child. The ipecacuanha wine will, by loosening the
phlegm, loosen the cough, which is the only right way to get rid of a
cough. Let what I have now said be impressed deeply upon your memory, as
thousands of children in England are annually destroyed by having their
coughs stopped. Avoid, until the bronchitis be relieved, giving him
broths, and meat, and stimulants of all kinds. For further observations
on _what_ NOT _to do_ in bronchitis, I beg to refer you to a previous
Conversation we had on _what_ NOT _to do_ in inflammation of the lungs.
That which is injurious in the one case is equally so in the other.

206. _What are the symptoms of Diphtheria, or, as it is sometimes
called, Boulogne sore throat?_

This terrible disease, although by many considered to be a new
complaint, is, in point of fact, of very ancient origin. Homer, and
Hippocrates, the father of physic, have both described it. Diphtheria
first appeared in England in the beginning of the year 1857, since which
time it has never totally left our shores.

_The symptoms._—The little patient, before the disease really shows
itself, feels poorly, and is “out of sorts.” A shivering fit, though not
severe, may generally be noticed. There is heaviness, and slight
headache, principally over the eyes. Sometimes, but not always, there is
a mild attack of delirium at night. The next day he complains of slight
difficulty of swallowing. If old enough, he will complain of
constriction about the swallow. On examining the throat the tonsils will
be found to be swollen and redder—more darkly red than usual. Slight
specks will be noticed on the tonsils. In a day or two an exudation will
cover them, the back of the swallow, the palate, the tongue, and
sometimes the inside of the cheeks and the nostrils. The exudation of
lymph gradually increases until it becomes a regular membrane, which
puts on the appearance of leather; hence its name diphtheria. This
membrane peels off in pieces; and if the child be old and strong enough
he will sometimes spit it up in quantities, the membrane again and again
rapidly forming as before. The discharges from the throat are
occasionally, but not always offensive. There is danger of croup from
the extension of the membrane into the windpipe. The glands about the
neck and under the jaw are generally much swollen; the skin is rather
cold and clammy; the urine is scanty and usually pale; the bowels at
first are frequently relaxed. This diarrhœa may or may not cease as the
disease advances.

The child is now in a perilous condition, and it becomes a battle
between his constitution and the disease. If, unfortunately, as is too
often the case—diphtheria being more likely to attack the weakly—the
child be very delicate, there is but slight hope of recovery. The danger
of the disease is not always to be measured by the state of the throat.
Sometimes, when the patient appears to be getting well, a sudden change
for the worse rapidly carries him off. Hence the importance of great
caution, in such cases, in giving an opinion as to ultimate recovery. I
have said enough to prove the terrible nature of the disease, and to
show the necessity of calling in, at the earliest period of the
symptoms, an experienced and skillful medical man.

207. _Is Diphtheria contagious?_

_Decidedly._ Therefore, when practicable, the rest of the children ought
instantly to be removed to a distance. I say _children_, for it is
emphatically a disease of childhood. When adults have it, it is the
exception, and not the rule. “Thus it will be seen, in the account given
of the Boulogne epidemic, that of 366 deaths from this cause, 341
occurred among children under ten years of age. In the Lincolnshire
epidemic, in the autumn of 1858, all the deaths at Horncastle, 25 in
number, occurred among children under twelve years of age.”

208. _What are the causes of Diphtheria?_

Bad and imperfect drainage; want of ventilation; overflowing privies;
low neighborhoods in the vicinity of rivers; stagnant waters; indeed,
every thing that vitiates the air and thus depresses the system, more
especially if the weather be close and muggy; poor and improper food;
and last, though not least, contagion. “Now all my carefully conducted
inquiries induce me to believe that the disease comes from drain-poison.
All the cases into which I could fully inquire have brought conviction
to my mind that there is a direct law of sequence in some peculiar
conditions of atmosphere between diphtheria and bad drainage; and if
this be proved by subsequent investigations, we may be able to prevent a
disease which, in too many cases, our known remedies cannot cure.”—W.
Carr, Esq., Blackheath. _British Medical Journal._ Bear in mind, too,
that a delicate child is much more predisposed to the disease than a
strong one.

209. _What is the treatment of Diphtheria?_

_What to do._—Examine well into the ventilation, for as diphtheria is
frequently caused by deficient ventilation, the best remedy is thorough
ventilation. Look well both to the drains and to the privies, and see
that the drains from the water-closets and from the privies do not in
any way contaminate the pump water. If the drains be defective or the
privies be full, the disease in your child will be generated, fed, and
fostered. Not only so, but the disease will spread in your family and
all around you.

Keep the child to his bed-room and to his bed. For the first two or
three days, while the fever runs high, put him on a low diet, such as
milk, tea, arrow-root, etc.

Apply to his throat every four hours a warm barm and oatmeal poultice.
If he be old enough to have the knowledge to use a gargle, the following
will be found serviceable:

                    Take of—Powdered Alum, one drachm;
                             Simple Syrup, one ounce;
                             Water, seven ounces:

  To make a Gargle.

The best medicine for the first few days of the attack, is one of the
following mixtures:

             Take of—Chlorate of Potash, two drachms;
                      Boiling Water, seven ounces and a half;
                      Syrup of Red Poppy, half an ounce:

  To make a Mixture. A tablespoonful to be taken every four hours.

Or,

           Take of—Diluted Sulphuric Acid, one drachm;
                    Simple Syrup, one ounce and a half;
                    Infusion of Roses, four ounces and a half;

  To make a Mixture. A tablespoonful to be given every four hours.

  Let the infusion of roses be made merely with the rose-leaves and
  boiling water.

As soon as the skin has lost its preternatural heat, beef-tea and
chicken broth ought to be given. Or if great prostration should
supervene, in addition to the beef-tea, port wine, a tablespoonful every
four hours, should be administered. If the child be cold, and there be
great sinking of the vital powers, brandy and water should be
substituted for the port wine. Remember, in ordinary cases, port wine
and brandy are not necessary, _but in cases of extreme exhaustion_ they
are most valuable.

As soon as the great heat of the skin has abated and the debility has
set in, one of the following mixtures will be found useful:

               Take of—Wine of Iron, one ounce and a half;
                        Simple Syrup, one ounce;
                        Water, three ounces and a half:

  To make a Mixture. A tablespoonful to be taken every four hours.

Or,

            Take of—Muriated Tincture of Iron, half a drachm;
                     Simple Syrup, one ounce;
                     Water, three ounces:

  To make a Mixture. A tablespoonful to be taken three times a day.

If the disease should travel downward, it will cause all the symptoms of
croup, then it must be treated as croup; with this only difference, that
a blister (_tela vesicatoria_) must _not_ be applied, or the blistered
surface may be attacked by the membrane of diphtheria, which may either
cause death or hasten that catastrophe. In every other respect treat the
case as croup, by giving an emetic, a teaspoonful of ipecacuanha wine
every five minutes, until free vomiting be excited, and then administer
smaller doses of ipecacuanha wine every two or three hours, as I
recommended when conversing with you on the treatment of croup.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not, on any account, apply either leeches or a
blister. If the latter be applied, it is almost sure to be covered with
the membrane of diphtheria, similar to that inside of the mouth and of
the throat, which would be a serious complication. Do not give either
calomel or emetic tartar. Do not depress the system by aperients, for
diphtheria is an awfully depressing complaint of itself; the patient, in
point of fact, is laboring under the depressing effects of poison, for
the blood has been poisoned either by the drinking water being
contaminated by fecal matter from either a privy or from a water-closet;
by some horrid drain; by proximity to a pig-sty; by an overflowing
privy, especially if vegetable matter be rotting at the same time in it;
by bad ventilation, or by contagion. Diphtheria may generally be traced
either to the one or to the other of the above causes; therefore let me
urgently entreat you to look well into all these matters, and thus to
stay the pestilence! Diphtheria might long remain in a neighborhood if
active measures be not used to exterminate it.

210. _Have the goodness to describe the symptoms of Measles?_

Measles commences with symptoms of a common cold; the patient is at
first chilly, then hot and feverish; he has a running at the nose,
sneezing, watering and redness of the eyes, headache, drowsiness, a
hoarse and peculiar ringing cough, which nurses call “measle-cough,” and
difficulty of breathing. These symptoms usually last three days before
the eruption appears; on the fourth it (the eruption) generally makes
its appearance, and continues for four days and then disappears, lasting
altogether, from the commencement of the symptoms of cold to the decline
of the eruption, seven days. It is important to bear in mind that the
eruption consists of _crescent-shaped—half-moon-shaped—patches_; that
they usually appear first about the face and the neck, in which places
they are the best marked; then on the body and on the arms; and, lastly,
on the legs, and that they are slightly raised above the surface of the
skin. The face is swollen, more especially the eyelids, which are
sometimes for a few days closed.

Well, then, remember, _the running at the nose, the sneezing, the
peculiar hoarse cough, and the half-moon-shaped patches_, are the
leading features of the disease, and point out for a certainty that it
is measles.

211. _What constitutes the principal danger in Measles?_

The affection of the chest. The mucous or lining membrane of the
bronchial tubes is always more or less inflamed, and the lungs
themselves are sometimes affected.

212. _Do you recommend “surfeit water” and saffron tea to throw out the
eruption in Measles?_

Certainly not. The only way to throw out the eruption, as it is called,
is to keep the body comfortably warm, and to give the beverages ordered
by the medical man, with the chill off. “Surfeit water,” saffron tea,
and remedies of that class, are hot and stimulating. The only effect
they can have, will be to increase the fever and the inflammation—to add
fuel to the fire.

213. _What is the treatment of Measles?_

_What to do._—The child ought to be confined both to his room and to his
bed, the room being kept comfortably warm; therefore, if it be winter
time, there should be a small fire in the grate; in the summer time, a
fire would be improper. The child must not be exposed to draughts;
notwithstanding, from time to time, the door ought to be left a little
ajar in order to change the air of the apartment; for proper
ventilation, let the disease be what it may, is absolutely necessary.

Let the child, for the first few days, be kept on a low diet, such as on
milk and water, arrow-root, bread and butter, etc.

If the attack be mild, that is to say, if the breathing be not much
affected (for in measles it always is more or less affected), and if
there be not much wheezing, the acidulated infusion of roses’ mixture
will be all that is necessary. (See question 209.)

But suppose that the breathing is short, and that there is a great
wheezing, then, instead of giving him the mixture just advised, give him
a teaspoonful of a mixture composed of ipecacuanha wine, syrup, and
water, every four hours. (See question 202.) And if, on the following
day, the breathing and the wheezing be not relieved, in addition to the
ipecacuanha mixture, apply a tela vesicatoria, as advised under the head
of inflammation of the lungs.

When the child is convalescing, batter puddings, rice, and sago
puddings, in addition to the milk, bread and butter, etc., should be
given; and, a few days later, chicken, mutton-chops, etc.

The child ought not, even in a mild case of measles, and in favorable
weather, to be allowed to leave the house under a fortnight, or it might
bring on an attack of bronchitis.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not give either “surfeit water” or wine. Do not
apply leeches to the chest. Do not expose the child to the cold air. Do
not keep the bed-room very hot, but comfortably warm. Do not let the
child leave the house, even under favorable circumstances, under a
fortnight. Do not, while the eruption is out, give aperients. Do not,
“to ease the cough,” administer either emetic tartar or paregoric—the
former drug is awfully depressing; the latter will stop the cough, and
will thus prevent the expulsion of the phlegm.

214. _What is the difference between Scarlatina and Scarlet Fever?_

They are, indeed, one and the same disease, scarlatina being the Latin
for scarlet fever. But, in a _popular_ sense, when the disease is mild,
it is usually called scarlatina. The latter term does not sound so
formidable to the ears either of patients or of parents.

215. _Will you describe the symptoms of Scarlet Fever?_

The patient is generally chilly, languid, drowsy, feverish, and poorly
for two days before the eruption appears. At the end of the second day,
the characteristic, bright scarlet efflorescence, somewhat similar to
the color of a boiled lobster, usually first shows itself. The scarlet
appearance is not confined to the skin; but the tongue, the throat, and
the whites of the eyes put on the same appearance; with this only
difference, that on the tongue and on the throat the scarlet is much
darker; and, as Dr. Elliotson accurately describes it,—“the tongue looks
as if it had been slightly sprinkled with Cayenne pepper.” The eruption
usually declines on the fifth, and is generally indistinct on the sixth
day; on the seventh it has completely faded away. There is usually,
after the first few days, great itching on the surface of the body. The
skin, at the end of the week, begins to peel and to dust off, making it
look as though meal had been sprinkled upon it.

There are three forms of scarlet fever,—the one where the throat is
_little_, if at all affected, and this is a mild form of the disease;
the second, which is generally, especially at night, attended with
delirium, where the throat is _much_ affected, being often greatly
inflamed and ulcerated; and the third (which is, except in certain
unhealthy districts, comparatively rare, and which is VERY dangerous),
the malignant form.

216. _Would it be well to give a little cooling, opening physic as soon
as a child begins to sicken for Scarlet Fever?_

_On no account whatever._ Aperient medicines are, in my opinion, highly
improper and dangerous both before and during the period of the
eruption. It is my firm conviction that the administration of opening
medicine, at such times, is one of the principal causes of scarlet fever
being so frequently fatal. This is, of course, more applicable to the
poor, and to those who are unable to procure a skillful medical man.

217. _What constitutes the principal danger in Scarlet Fever?_

The affection of the throat, the administration of opening medicine
during the first ten days, and a peculiar disease of the kidneys ending
in _anasarca_ (dropsy), on which account, the medical man ought, when
practicable, to be sent for at the onset, that no time may be lost in
applying _proper_ remedies.

218. _How would you distinguish between Scarlet Fever and Measles?_

Measles commences with symptoms of a common cold; scarlet fever does
not. Measles has a _peculiar hoarse_ cough; scarlet fever has not. The
eruption of measles is in patches of a half-moon shape, and is slightly
raised above the skin; the eruption of scarlet fever is _not_ raised
above the skin at all, and is one continued mass. The color of the
eruption is much more vivid in scarlet fever than in measles. The chest
is the part principally affected in measles, and the throat in scarlet
fever.

There is an excellent method of determining, for a certainty, whether
the eruption be that of scarlatina or otherwise. I myself have, in
several instances, ascertained the truth of it: “For several years M.
Bouchut has remarked in the eruption of scarlatina a curious phenomenon,
which serves to distinguish this eruption from that of measles,
erythema, erysipelas, etc., a phenomenon essentially vital, and which is
connected with the excessive contractability of the capillaries. The
phenomenon in question is a _white line_, which can be produced at
pleasure by drawing the back of the nail along the skin where the
eruption is situated. On drawing the nail, or the extremity of a hard
body (such as a pen-holder), along the eruption, the skin is observed to
grow pale, and to present a white trace, which remains for one or two
minutes, or longer, and then disappears. In this way the diagnosis of
the disease may be very distinctly written on the skin; the word
‘Scarlatina’ disappears as the eruption regains its uniform
tint.”—_Edinburgh Medical Journal._

219. _Is it of so much importance, then, to distinguish between Scarlet
Fever and Measles?_

It is of great importance, as in measles the patient ought to be kept
_moderately_ warm, and the drinks should be given with the chill off;
while in scarlet fever the patient ought to be kept cool—indeed, for the
first few days, _cold_; and the beverages, such as spring water, toast
and water, etc., should be administered quite cold.

I had the honor to read a _Paper on the Treatment of Scarlet Fever_
before the members of Queen’s College Medico-Chirurgical Society,
Birmingham,—which _Paper_ was afterwards published in the _Association
Journal_; and in Braithwaite’s _Retrospect of Medicine_; and in
Ranking’s _Half-Yearly Abstract of the Medical Sciences_; besides in
other publications. Moreover, the _Paper_ was translated into German,
and published in _Canstatt’s Jahresbericht_, iv. 456.

220. _What is the treatment of Scarlet Fever?_

_What to do._—Pray pay particular attention to my rules, and carry out
my directions to the very letter—as I can then promise you _that if the
scarlet fever be not malignant_, the plan I am about to recommend will,
with God’s blessing, be generally successful.

What is the first thing to be done? Send the child to bed; throw open
the windows, be it winter or summer, and have a thorough ventilation;
for the bed-room must be kept cool, I may say cold. Do not be afraid of
fresh air, for fresh air, for the first few days is essential to
recovery. _Fresh air, and plenty of it, in scarlet fever, is the best
doctor_ a child can have: let these words be written legibly on your
mind. In the _Times_, is the following, copied from the _Bridgewater
Mercury_:—

“GROSS SUPERSTITION.—In one of the streets of Taunton there resides a
man and his wife who have the care of a child. This child was attacked
with scarlatina, and to all appearance death was inevitable. A jury of
matrons was, as it were, impaneled, and, to prevent the child ‘dying
hard,’ all the doors in the house, all the drawers, all the boxes, all
the cupboards were thrown wide open, the keys taken out, and the body of
the child placed under a beam, whereby a sure, certain, and easy passage
into eternity could be secured. Watchers held their vigils throughout
the weary night, and in the morning the child, to the surprise of all,
did not die, and is now gradually recovering.”

These old women—this jury of matrons—stumbled on the right remedy, “all
the doors in the house ... were thrown wide open,” and thus they
thoroughly ventilated the apartment. What was the consequence? The child
who, just before the opening of the doors, had all the appearances “that
death was inevitable,” as soon as fresh air was let in, showed symptoms
of recovery, “and in the morning the child, to the surprise of all, did
not die, and is now gradually recovering.” There is nothing
wonderful—there is nothing surprising to my mind—in all this.
Ventilation—thorough ventilation—is the grand remedy for scarlatina! Oh,
that there were in scarlet fever cases a good many such old women’s—such
a “jury of matrons”—remedies! We should not then be horrified, as we now
are, at the fearful records of death, which the Returns of the
Registrar-General disclose!

Take down the curtains of the bed; remove the valances. If it be summer
time, let the child be only covered with a sheet: if it be winter time,
in addition to the sheet, he should have one blanket over him.

Now for the throat.—The best _external_ application is a barm and
oatmeal poultice. How ought it to be made, and how applied? Put half a
teacupful of barm into a saucepan, put it on the fire to boil; as soon
as it boils take it off the fire, and stir oatmeal into it, until it is
of the consistence of a nice soft poultice; then place it on a rag, and
apply it to the throat; carefully fasten it on with bandage, two or
three turns of the bandage going round the throat, and two or three over
the crown of the head, so as nicely to apply the poultice where it is
wanted—that is to say, to cover the tonsils. Tack the bandage: do not
pin it. Let the poultice be changed three times a day. The best medicine
is the acidulated infusion of roses, sweetened with syrup. [For the
prescription of the acidulated infusion of roses with syrup, see
question 209.] It is grateful and refreshing, it is pleasant to take, it
abates fever and thirst, it cleans the throat and tongue of mucus, and
is peculiarly efficacious in scarlet fever; as soon as the fever is
abated it gives an appetite. My belief is that the sulphuric acid in the
mixture is a specific in scarlet fever, as much as quinine is in ague,
and sulphur in itch. I have reason to say so, for, in numerous cases, I
have seen its immense value.

Now, with regard to food.—If the child be at the breast, keep him
entirely to it. If he be weaned, and under two years old, give him milk
and water, and cold water to drink. If he be older, give him toast and
water, and plain water from the pump, as much as he chooses; let it be
quite cold—the colder the better. Weak black tea, or thin gruel, may be
given, but not caring, unless he be an infant at the breast, if he take
nothing but _cold_ water. If the child be two years old and upwards,
roasted apples with sugar, and grapes will be very refreshing, and will
tend to cleanse both the mouth and the throat. Avoid broths and
stimulants of every kind.

When the appetite returns, you may consider the patient to be safe. The
diet ought now to be gradually improved. Bread and butter, milk and
water, and arrow-root made with equal parts of new milk and water,
should for the first two or three days be given. Then a light batter or
rice pudding may be added, and in a few days afterward, either a little
chicken or a mutton-chop.

The essential remedies, then, in scarlet fever, are, for the first few
days—(1) plenty of fresh air and ventilation, (2) plenty of cold water
to drink, (3) barm poultices to the throat, and (4) the acidulated
infusion of roses’ mixture as a medicine.

Now, then, comes very important advice. After the first few days,
probably five or six, sometimes as early as the fourth day, _watch
carefully and warily, and note the time, the skin will suddenly become
cool_, the child will say that he feels chilly; then is the time you
must now change your tactics—_instantly close the windows, and put extra
clothing_, a blanket or two on his bed. A flannel night-gown should,
until the dead skin has peeled off, be now worn next to the skin, when
the flannel night-gown should be discontinued. The patient ought ever
after to wear, in the daytime, a flannel waistcoat. On the importance,
the vital importance, of the wearing of flannel next to the skin, see
Flannel Waistcoats. His drinks must now be given with the chill off; he
ought to have a warm cup of tea, and gradually his diet should, as I
have previously recommended, be improved.

There is one important caution I wish to impress upon you,—_do not give
opening medicine during the time the eruption is out_. In all
probability the bowels will be opened: if so, all well and good; but do
not, on any account, for the first ten days, use artificial means to
open them. It is my firm conviction that the administration of
purgatives in scarlet fever is a fruitful source of dropsy, of disease
and death. When we take into consideration the sympathy there is between
the skin and the mucous membrane, I think that we should pause before
giving irritating medicines, such as purgatives. The irritation of
aperients on the mucous membrane may cause the poison of the skin
disease (for scarlet fever is a blood poison) to be driven internally to
the kidneys, to the throat, to the pericardium (bag of the heart), or to
the brain. You may say, Do you not purge if the bowels be not open for a
week? I say emphatically, No!

I consider my great success in the treatment of scarlet fever to be
partly owing to my avoidance of aperients during the first ten days of
the child’s illness.

If the bowels, after the ten days, are not properly opened, a dose or
two of the following mixture should be given:

                 Take of—Simple Syrup, three drachms;
                          Essence of Senna, nine drachms:

  To make a Mixture. Two teaspoonfuls to be given early in the morning
  occasionally, and to be repeated in four hours, if the first dose
  should not operate.

In a subsequent Conversation, I shall strongly urge you not to allow
your child, when convalescent, to leave the house under at least a month
from the commencement of the illness; I therefore beg to refer you to
that Conversation, and hope that you will give it your best and earnest
consideration! During the last seventeen years I have never had dropsy
from scarlet fever, and I attribute it entirely to the plan I have just
recommended, and in not allowing my patients to leave the house under
the month—until, in fact, the skin that has peeled off has been renewed.

Let us now sum up the plan I adopt:

1. Thorough ventilation, a cool room, and scant clothes on the bed, for
the first five or six days.

2. A change of temperature of the skin to be carefully regarded. As soon
as the skin is cool, closing the windows, and putting additional
clothing on the bed.

3. The acidulated infusion of roses with syrup is _the_ medicine for
scarlet fever.

4. Purgatives to be religiously avoided for the first ten days at least,
and even afterward, unless there be absolute necessity.

5. Leeches, blisters, emetics, cold and tepid spongings, and painting
the tonsils with caustic, inadmissible in scarlet fever.

6. A strict antiphlogistic (low) diet for the first few days, during
which time cold water to be given _ad libitum_.

7. The patient _not_ to leave the house in the summer under the month;
in the winter, under six weeks.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not, then, apply either leeches or blisters to
the throat; do not paint the tonsils with caustic; do not give
aperients; do not, on any account, give either calomel or emetic tartar;
do not, for the first few days of the illness, be afraid of _cold air_
to the skin, and of cold water as a beverage; do not, emphatically let
me say, _do not_ let the child leave the house for at least a month from
the commencement of the illness.

My firm conviction is, that purgatives, emetics, and blisters, by
depressing the patient, sometimes cause ordinary scarlet fever to
degenerate into malignant scarlet fever.

I am aware that some of our first authorities advocate a different plan
to mine. They recommend purgatives, which I may say, in scarlet fever,
are my dread and abhorrence. They advise cold and tepid spongings—a plan
which I think dangerous, as it will probably drive the disease
internally. Blisters, too, have been prescribed; these I consider
weakening, injurious, and barbarous, and likely still more to inflame
the already inflamed skin. They recommend leeches to the throat, which I
am convinced, by depressing the patient, will lessen the chance of his
battling against the disease, and will increase the ulceration of the
tonsils. Again, the patient has not too much blood; the blood is only
poisoned. I look upon scarlet fever as a specific poison of the blood,
and one which will be eliminated from the system, _not_ by bleeding,
_not_ by purgatives, _not_ by emetics, but by a constant supply of fresh
and cool air, by the acid treatment, by cold water as a beverage, and
for the first few days by a strict antiphlogistic (low) diet.

Sydenham says that scarlet fever is oftentimes “fatal through the
officiousness of the doctor.” I conscientiously believe that a truer
remark was never made; and that under a different system to the usual
one adopted, scarlet fever would not be so much dreaded.

If any of my medical brethren should do me the honor to read these
pages, let me entreat them to try my plan of treating scarlet fever, as
my success has been great. I have given full and minute particulars, in
order that they and mothers (if mothers cannot obtain medical advice)
may give my plan a fair and impartial trial. My only stipulations are
that they must _begin_ with my treatment, and _not mix_ any other with
it, and carry out my plan to the very letter. I then, with God’s
blessing, shall not fear the result; but shall rejoice that I have been
of some little service in my generation.

221. _How soon ought a child to be allowed to leave the house after an
attack of Scarlet Fever?_

He must _not_ be allowed to go out for at least a month from the
commencement of the attack, in the summer, and six weeks in the winter;
and not even then without the express permission of a medical man. It
might be said that this is an unreasonable recommendation: but when it
is considered that the whole of the skin generally desquamates, or peels
off, and consequently leaves the surface of the body exposed to cold,
which cold flies to the kidneys, producing a peculiar and serious
disease in them, ending in dropsy, this warning will not be deemed
unreasonable.

Scarlet fever dropsy, which is really a _formidable disease, generally
arises from the carelessness, the ignorance, and the thoughtlessness of
parents in allowing a child to leave the house before the new skin is
properly formed and hardened_. Prevention is always better than cure.

Thus far with regard to the danger to the child himself. Now, if you
please, let me show you the risk of contagion that you inflict upon
families, in allowing your child to mix with others before a month at
least has elapsed. Bear in mind, a case is quite as contagious, if not
more so, while the skin is peeling off, as it was before. Thus, in ten
days or a fortnight, there is as much risk of contagion as at the
_beginning_ of the disease, and when the fever is at its height. At the
conclusion of the month the old skin has generally all peeled off, and
the new skin has taken its place; consequently there will then be less
fear of contagion to others. But the contagion of scarlet fever is so
subtle and so uncertain in its duration, that it is impossible to fix
the exact time when it ceases.

Let me most earnestly implore you to ponder well on the above important
facts. If these remarks should be the means of saving only one child
from death, or from broken health, my labor will not have been in vain.

222. _What means do you advise to purify a house from the contagion of
Scarlet Fever?_

Let every room be _lime-washed_ and then be whitewashed; if the
contagion has been virulent, let every bed-room be freshly papered (the
walls having been previously stripped of the old paper and then
lime-washed); let the bed, the bolsters, the pillows, and the mattresses
be cleansed and purified; let the blankets and coverlids be thoroughly
washed, and then let them be exposed to the open air—if taken into a
field so much the better; let the rooms be well scoured; let the
windows, top and bottom, be thrown wide open; let the drains be
carefully examined; let the pump water be scrutinized, to see that it be
not contaminated by fecal matter, either from the water-closet or from
the privy; let privies be emptied of their contents—_remember this is
most important advice_—then put into the empty places lime and powdered
charcoal, for it is a well-ascertained fact that it is frequently
impossible to rid a house of the infection of scarlet fever without
adopting such a course. “It would be well if we were to use whitewash in
many cases where great cleanliness of surface cannot be obtained. We
remove in this way, by an easy method, much of the dullness and still
more of the unwholesomeness of dirt.”—Dr. Angus Smith. “In St. George’s,
Southwark, the medical officer reports that scarlatina ‘has raged
fatally, almost exclusively where privy or drain smells are to be
perceived in the houses.’” Let the children who have not had, or who do
not appear to be sickening for scarlet fever, be sent away from home—if
to a farm-house so much the better. Indeed, leave no stone unturned, no
means untried, to exterminate the disease from the house and from the
neighborhood.

223. _Will you describe the symptoms of Chicken-pox?_

It is occasionally, but not always, ushered in with a slight shivering
fit; the eruption shows itself in about twenty-four hours from the child
first appearing poorly. It is a vesicular disease. _Vesicles._ Small
elevations of the cuticle, covering a fluid which is generally clear and
colorless at first, but becomes afterward whitish and opaque, or
pearly.—_Watson._ The eruption comes out in the form of small pimples,
and principally attacks the scalp, the neck, the back, the chest, and
the shoulders, but rarely the face; while in small-pox the face is
generally the part most affected. The next day these pimples fill with
water, and thus become vesicles; on the third day they are at maturity.
The vesicles are quite separate and distinct from each other. There is a
slight redness around each of them. Fresh ones, while the others are
dying away, make their appearance. Chicken-pox is usually attended with
a slight itching of the skin; when the vesicles are scratched the fluid
escapes, and leaves hard pearl-like substances; which, in a few days,
disappear. Chicken-pox never leaves pit-marks behind. It is a child’s
complaint; adults scarcely, if ever, have it.

224. _Is there any danger in Chicken-pox; and what treatment do you
advise?_

It is not at all a dangerous, but, on the contrary, a trivial complaint.
It lasts only a few days, and requires but little medicine. The patient
ought, for three or four days, to keep the house, and should abstain
from animal food. On the sixth day, but not until then, a dose or two of
a mild aperient is all that will be required.

225. _Is Chicken-pox infectious?_

There is a diversity of opinion on this head, but one thing is
certain—it cannot be communicated by inoculation.

226. _What are the symptoms of Modified Small-pox?_

The modified small-pox—that is to say, small-pox that has been robbed of
its virulence by the patient having been either already vaccinated, or
by his having had a previous attack of small-pox—is ushered in with
severe symptoms, with symptoms almost as severe as though the patient
had not been already somewhat protected either by vaccination or by the
previous attack of small-pox—that is to say, he has a shivering fit,
great depression of spirits and debility, _malaise_, sickness, headache,
and occasionally delirium. After the above symptoms have lasted about
three days, the eruption shows itself. The immense value of the previous
vaccination, or the previous attack of small-pox, now comes into play.
In a case of _unprotected_ small-pox, the appearance of the eruption
_aggravates_ all the above symptoms, and the danger begins; while in the
_modified_ small-pox, the moment the eruption shows itself, the patient
feels better, and, as a rule, rapidly recovers. The eruption of
_modified_ small-pox varies materially from the eruption of the
_unprotected_ small-pox. The former eruption assumes a varied character,
and is composed, first of vesicles (containing water), and secondly of
pustules (containing matter), each of which pustules has a depression in
the center, and thirdly of several red pimples without either water or
matter in them, and which sometimes assume a livid appearance. These
“breakings-out” generally show themselves more upon the wrist, and
sometimes up one or both of the nostrils. While in the latter
disease—the _unprotected_ small-pox—the “breaking-out” is composed
entirely of pustules containing matter, and which pustules are more on
the face than on any other part of the body. There is generally a
peculiar smell in both diseases—an odor once smelt never to be
forgotten.

Now, there is one most important remark I have to make,—_the modified
small-pox is contagious_. This ought to be borne in mind, as a person
laboring under the disease must, if there be children in the house,
either be sent away himself, or else the children ought to be banished
both the house and the neighborhood. Another important piece of advice
is, let _all_ in the house—children and adults, one and all—be
vaccinated, even if any or all have been previously vaccinated.

_Treatment._—Let the patient keep his room, and if he be very ill, his
bed. Let the chamber be well ventilated. If it be winter time, a small
fire in the grate will encourage ventilation. If it be summer, a fire is
out of the question; indeed, in such a case, the window-sash ought to be
opened, as thorough ventilation is an important requisite of cure, both
in small-pox and in _modified_ small-pox. While the eruption is out, do
not on any account give aperient medicine. In ten days from the
commencement of the illness a mild aperient may be given. The best
medicine in these cases is, the sweetened acidulated infusion of roses
(See question 209), which ought to be given from the commencement of the
disease, and should be continued until the fever be abated. For the
first few days, as long as the fever lasts, the patient ought not to be
allowed either meat or broth, but should be kept on a low diet, such as
on gruel, arrow-root, milk-puddings, etc. As soon as the fever is abated
he ought gradually to resume his usual diet. When he is convalescent, it
is well, where practicable, that he should have change of air for a
month.

227. _How would you distinguish between Modified Small-pox and
Chicken-pox?_

Modified small-pox may readily be distinguished from chicken-pox, by the
former disease being, notwithstanding its modification, much more severe
and the fever much more intense _before_ the eruption shows itself than
chicken-pox; indeed, in chicken-pox there is little or no fever, either
before or after the eruption; by the former disease, the modified
small-pox, consisting _partly_ of pustules (containing matter), each
pustule having a depression in the centre, and the favorite localities
of the pustules being the wrists and the inside of the nostrils: while,
in the chicken-pox, the eruption consists of vesicles (containing
water), and _not_ pustules (containing matter), and the vesicles having
neither a depression in the centre, nor having any particular partiality
to attack either the wrists or the wings of the nose. In modified
small-pox each pustule is, as in unprotected small-pox, inflamed at the
base; while in chicken-pox there is only very slight redness around each
vesicle. The vesicles, too, in chicken-pox are small—much smaller than
the pustules are in modified small-pox.

228. _Is hooping-cough an inflammatory disease?_

Hooping-cough in itself is not inflammatory, it is purely spasmodic; but
it is generally accompanied with more or less of bronchitis—inflammation
of the mucous membrane of the bronchial tubes—on which account it is
necessary, _in all cases_ of hooping-cough, to consult a medical man,
that he may watch the progress of the disease and nip inflammation in
the bud.

229. _Will you have the goodness to give the symptoms, and a brief
history, of Hooping-cough?_

Hooping-cough is emphatically a disease of the young; it is rare for
adults to have it; if they do, they usually suffer more severely than
children. A child seldom has it but once in his life. It is highly
contagious, and therefore frequently runs through a whole family of
children, giving much annoyance, anxiety, and trouble to the mother and
the nurses; hence hooping-cough is much dreaded by them. It is amenable
to treatment. Spring and summer are the best seasons of the year for the
disease to occur. This complaint usually lasts from six to twelve
weeks—sometimes for a much longer period, more especially if proper
means are not employed to relieve it.

Hooping-cough commences as a common cold and cough. The cough, for ten
days or a fortnight, increases in intensity; at about which time it puts
on the characteristic “hoop.” The attack of cough comes on in paroxysms.

In a paroxysm the child coughs so long and so violently, and _expires_
so much air from the lungs without _inspiring_ any, that at times he
appears nearly suffocated and exhausted; the veins of his neck swell;
his face is nearly purple; his eyes, with the tremendous exertion, seem
almost to start from their sockets; at length there is a sudden
_inspiration_ of air through the contracted chink of the upper part of
the windpipe—the glottis—causing the peculiar “hoop;” and, after a
little more coughing, he brings up some glairy mucus from the chest; and
sometimes, by vomiting, food from the stomach; he is at once relieved
until the next paroxysm occurs, when the same process is repeated, the
child during the intervals, in a favorable case, appearing quite well,
and after the cough is over, instantly returning either to his play or
to his food. Generally, after a paroxysm he is hungry, unless, indeed,
there be severe inflammation either of the chest or of the lungs.
Sickness, as I before remarked, frequently accompanies hooping-cough;
when it does, it might be looked upon as a good sign. The child usually
knows when an attack is coming on; he dreads it, and therefore tries to
prevent it; he sometimes partially succeeds; but if he does, it only
makes the attack, when it does come, more severe. All causes of
irritation and excitement ought, as much as possible, to be avoided, as
passion is apt to bring on a severe paroxysm.

A new-born babe, an infant of one or two months old, commonly escapes
the infection; but if at that tender age he unfortunately catch
hooping-cough, it is likely to fare harder with him than if he were
older—the younger the child the greater the risk. But still, in such a
case, do not despair, as I have known numerous instances of new-born
infants, with judicious care, recover perfectly from the attack, and
thrive after it as though nothing of the kind had ever happened.

A new-born babe laboring under hooping-cough is liable to convulsions,
which is, in this disease, one, indeed the great, source of danger. A
child, too, who is teething, and laboring under the disease, is also
liable to convulsions. When the patient is convalescing, care ought to
be taken that he does not catch cold, or the “hoop” might return.
Hooping-cough may either precede, attend, or follow an attack of
measles.

230. _What is the treatment of Hooping-cough?_

We will divide the hooping-cough into three stages, and treat each stage
separately.

_What to do._—_In the first stage_, the commencement of hooping-cough:
For the first ten days give the ipecacuanha wine mixture, a teaspoonful
three times a day. (For the prescription of the ipecacuanha wine
mixture, see question 202.) If the child be not weaned, keep him
entirely to the breast; if he be weaned, to a milk and farinaceous diet.
Confine him for the first ten days to the house, more especially if the
hooping-cough be attended, as it usually is, with more or less of
bronchitis. But take care that the rooms be well ventilated, for good
air is essential to the cure. If the bronchitis attending the
hooping-cough be severe, confine him to his bed, and treat him as though
it were simply a case of bronchitis. (For the treatment of bronchitis,
see question 205.)

_In the second stage_, discontinue the ipecacuanha mixture, and give Dr.
Gibb’s remedy—namely, nitric acid—which I have found to be an
efficacious and valuable one in hooping-cough:

         Take of—Diluted Nitric Acid, two drachms;
                  Compound Tincture of Cardamoms, half a drachm;
                  Simple Syrup, three ounces;
                  Water, two ounces and a half:

  Make a Mixture. One or two teaspoonfuls, or a tablespoonful, according
  to the age of the child—one teaspoonful for an infant of six months,
  and two teaspoonfuls for a child of twelve months, and one
  tablespoonful for a child of two years, every four hours, first
  shaking the bottle.

Let the spine and the chest be well rubbed every night and morning
either with Roche’s Embrocation, or with the following stimulating
liniment (first shaking the bottle):

                 Take of—Oil of Cloves, one drachm;
                          Oil of Amber, two drachms;
                          Camphorated Oil, nine drachms:

  Make a Liniment.

Let him wear a broad band of new flannel, which should extend round from
his chest to his back, and which ought to be changed every night and
morning, in order that it may be dried before putting on again. To keep
it in its place it should be fastened by means of tapes and with
shoulder-straps.

The diet ought now to be improved—he should gradually return to his
usual food; and, weather permitting, should almost live in the open
air—fresh air being, in such a case, one of the finest medicines.

_In the third stage_, that is to say, when the complaint has lasted a
month, if by that time the child is not well, there is nothing like
change of air to a high, dry, healthy, country place. Continue the
nitric acid mixture, and either the embrocation or the liniment to the
back and the chest, and let him continue to almost live in the open air,
and be sure that he does not discontinue wearing the flannel until he be
quite cured, and then let it be left off by degrees.

If the hooping-cough have caused debility, give him cod-liver oil, a
teaspoonful twice or three times a day, giving it him on a full stomach
after his meals.

But, remember, after the first three or four weeks, change of air, and
plenty of it, is for hooping-cough the grand remedy.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not apply leeches to the chest, for I would
rather put blood into a child laboring under hooping-cough than take it
out of him—hooping-cough is quite weakening enough to the system of
itself without robbing him of his life’s blood; do not, on any account
whatever, administer either emetic tartar or antimonial wine; do not
give either paregoric or syrup of white poppies; do not drug him either
with calomel or with grey powder; do not dose him with quack medicine;
do not give him stimulants, but rather give him plenty of nourishment,
such as milk and farinaceous food, but _no_ stimulants; do not be
afraid, after the first week or two, of his having fresh air, and plenty
of it—for fresh, pure air is the grand remedy, after all that can be
said and done, in hooping-cough. Although occasionally we find that if
the child be laboring under hooping-cough and is breathing a pure
country air, and is not getting well so rapidly as we could wish, change
of air to a smoky, gasladen town will sometimes quickly effect a cure;
indeed, some persons go so far as to say that the _best_ remedy for an
_obstinate_ case of hooping-cough is for the child to live the great
part of every day in gas-works!

231. _What is to be done during a paroxysm of Hooping-cough?_

If the child be old enough, let him stand up; but if he be either too
young or too feeble, raise his head, and bend his body a little forward;
then support his back with one hand, and the forehead with the other.
Let the mucus, the moment it is within reach, be wiped with a soft
handkerchief out of his mouth.

232. _In an obstinate case of Hooping-cough, what is the best remedy?_

Change of air, provided there be no active inflammation, to any healthy
spot. A farm-house, in a high, dry, and salubrious neighborhood, is as
good a place as can be chosen. If, in a short time, he be not quite
well, take him to the sea-side: the sea breezes will often, as if by
magic, drive away the disease.

233. _Suppose my child should have a shivering fit, is it to be looked
upon as an important symptom?_

Certainly. Nearly all _serious_ illnesses commence with a shivering fit:
severe colds, influenza, inflammations of different organs, scarlet
fever, measles, small-pox and very many other diseases, begin in this
way. If, therefore, your child should ever have a shivering fit,
_instantly_ send for a medical man, as delay might be dangerous. A few
hours of judicious treatment, at the commencement of an illness, is
frequently of more avail than days and weeks, nay months, of treatment,
when disease has gained a firm footing. A _serious_ disease often steals
on insidiously, and we have, perhaps, only the shivering fit, which
might be but a _slight_ one, to tell us of its approach.

A _trifling_ ailment, too, by neglecting the premonitory symptom, which,
at first, might only be indicated by a _slight_ shivering fit, will
sometimes become a _mortal_ disorder:

                “The little rift within the lute,
                That by-and-by will make the music mute,
                And ever widening slowly silence all.”

The above extract from Tennyson is, in my humble opinion, one of the
most beautiful pieces of poetry in the English language. It is a perfect
gem, and a volume in itself, so truthful, so exquisite, so full of the
most valuable reflections: for instance—(1) “The little rift within the
lute,”—the little tubercle within the lung, “that by-and-by will make
the music mute, and ever widening slowly silence all,” and the patient
eventually dies of consumption. (2) The little rent—the little rift of a
very minute vessel in the brain, produces an attack of apoplexy, and the
patient dies. (3) Each and all of us, in one form or another, sooner or
later will have “the little rift within the lute.” But why give more
illustrations? a little reflection will bring numerous examples to my
fair reader’s memory.

234. _In case of a shivering fit, perhaps you will tell me what to do?_

_Instantly_ have the bed warmed, and put the child to bed. Apply either
a hot bottle or a hot brick, wrapped in flannel, to the soles of his
feet. Put an extra blanket on his bed, and give him a hot cup of tea.

As soon as the shivering fit is over, and he has become hot, gradually
lessen the _extra_ quantity of clothes on his bed, and take away the hot
bottle or the hot brick from his feet.

_What_ NOT _to do_.—Do not give either brandy or wine, as inflammation
of some organ might be about taking place. Do not administer opening
medicine, as there might be some “breaking-out” coming out on the skin,
and an aperient might check it.

235. _My child, apparently otherwise healthy, screams out in the night
violently in his sleep, and nothing for a time will pacify him: what is
likely to be the cause, and what is the treatment?_

The causes of these violent screamings in the night are various. At one
time, they proceed from teething; at another, from worms; sometimes,
from night-mare; occasionally, from either disordered stomach or bowels.

Each of the above causes will, of course, require a different plan of
procedure; it will, therefore, be necessary to consult a medical man on
the subject, who will soon, with appropriate treatment, be able to
relieve him.

236. _Have the goodness to describe the complaint of children called
Mumps._

The mumps, inflammation of the “parotid” gland, is commonly ushered in
with a slight feverish attack. After a short time, a swelling, of stony
hardness, is noticed before and under the ear, which swelling extends
along the neck toward the chin. This lump is exceedingly painful, and
continues painful and swollen for four or five days. At the end of which
time it gradually disappears, leaving not a trace behind. The swelling
of mumps never gathers. It may affect one or both sides of the face. It
seldom occurs but once in a lifetime. It is contagious, and has been
known to run through a whole family or school; but it is not dangerous,
unless, which is rarely the case, it leaves the “parotid” gland, and
migrates either to the head, to the breast, or to the testicle.

237. _What is the treatment of Mumps?_

Foment the swelling, four or five times a day, with a flannel wrung out
of hot chamomile and poppy-head decoction; and apply, every night, a
barm and oatmeal poultice to the swollen gland or glands. Four
poppy-heads and four ounces of chamomile blows to be boiled in four
pints of water for half an hour, and then strained to make the
decoction. Debar, for a few days, the little patient from taking meat
and broth, and let him live on bread and milk, light puddings, and
arrow-root. Keep him in a well-ventilated room, and shut him out from
the company of his brothers, his sisters, and young companions. Give him
a little mild, aperient medicine. Of course, if there be the slightest
symptom of migration to any other part or parts, instantly call in a
medical man.

238. _What is the treatment of a Boil?_

One of the best applications is a Burgundy pitch plaster spread on a
soft piece of wash-leather. Let a chemist spread a plaster, about the
size of the hand; and, from this piece, cut small plasters, the size of
a shilling or a florin (according to the dimensions of the boil), which
snip around and apply to the part. Put a fresh one on daily. This
plaster will soon cause the boil to break; when it does break, squeeze
out the contents, the core, and the matter, and then apply one of the
plasters as before, which, until the boil be well, renew every day.

The old-fashioned remedy for a boil—namely, common yellow soap and brown
sugar, is a capital one for the purpose; it should be made into a paste,
and spread on a piece of coarse linen, the size either of a shilling or
of a florin (according to the size of the boil); it eases the pain and
causes the boil soon to break, and draws it when it is broken; it should
be renewed daily.

_If the boils should arise from the child being in a delicate state of
health_, give him cod-liver oil, meat once a day, and an abundance of
milk and farinaceous food. Let him have plenty of fresh air, exercise,
and play.

_If the boils should arise from gross and improper feeding_, then keep
him for a time from meat, and let him live principally on a milk and
farinaceous diet.

_If the child be fat and gross_, cod-liver oil would be improper; a mild
aperient, such as rhubarb and magnesia, would then be the best medicine.

239. _What are the symptoms of Earache?_

A young child screaming shrilly, violently, and continuously, is
oftentimes owing to earache; carefully, therefore, examine each ear, and
ascertain if there be any discharge; if there be, the mystery is
explained.

Screaming from earache may be distinguished from the screaming from
bowel-ache by the former (earache) being more continuous—indeed, being
one continued scream, and from the child putting his hand to his head;
while, in the latter (bowel-ache), the pain is more of a coming and of a
going character, and he draws up his legs to his bowels. Again, in the
former (earache), the secretions from the bowels are natural; while, in
the latter (bowel-ache), the secretions from the bowels are usually
depraved, and probably offensive. But a careful examination of the ear
will generally at once decide the nature of the case.

240. _What is the best remedy for Earache?_

Apply to the ear a small flannel bag, filled with hot salt—as hot as can
be comfortably borne, or foment the ear with a flannel wrung out of hot
chamomile and poppy-head decoction. A roasted onion, inclosed in muslin,
applied to the ear, is an old-fashioned and favorite remedy, and may, if
the bag of hot salt, or if the hot fomentation do not relieve, be tried.
Put into the ear, but not very far, a small piece of cotton-wool,
moistened with warm olive oil. Taking care that the wool is always
removed before a fresh piece be substituted, as if it be allowed to
remain in any length of time, it may produce a discharge from the ear.
Avoid all _cold_ applications. If the earache be severe, keep the little
fellow at home, in a room of equal temperature, but well ventilated, and
give him, for a day or two, no meat.

If a discharge from the ear should either accompany or follow the
earache, _more especially if the discharge be offensive_, instantly call
in a medical man, or deafness for life may be the result.

A knitted or crocheted hat, with woolen rosettes over the ears, is in
the winter time, an excellent hat for a child subject to earache. The
hat may be procured at any baby-linen warehouse.

241. _What are the causes and the treatment of discharges from the Ear?_

Cold, measles, scarlet fever, healing up of “breakings-out” behind the
ear; pellets of cotton-wool, which had been put in the ear, and had been
forgotten to be removed, are the usual causes of discharges from the
ear. It generally commences with earache.

The _treatment_ consists in keeping the parts clean, by syringing the
ear every morning with warm water, by attention to food, keeping the
child principally upon a milk and a farinaceous diet, and by change of
air, more especially to the coast. If change of air be not practicable,
great attention ought to be paid to ventilation. As I have before
advised, in all cases of discharge from the ear, call in a medical man,
as a little judicious medicine is advisable—indeed, essential; and it
may be necessary to syringe the ear with lotions, instead of with warm
water; and, of course, it is only a doctor who has actually seen the
patient who can decide these matters, and what is best to be done in
each individual case.

242. _What is the treatment of a “sty” in the eye-lid?_

Bathe the eye frequently with warm milk and water, and apply, every
night at bedtime, a warm white-bread poultice.

No medicine is required; but if the child be gross, keep him for a few
days from meat, and let him live on bread and milk and farinaceous
puddings.

243. _If a child have large bowels, what would you recommend as likely
to reduce their size?_

It ought to be borne in mind that the bowels of a child are larger in
proportion than those of an adult. But, if they be actually larger than
they ought to be, let them be well rubbed for a quarter of an hour at a
time night and morning, with soap liniment, and then apply a broad
flannel belt. “A broad flannel belt worn night and day, firm but not
tight, is very serviceable.” (Sir Charles Locock, in a _Letter_ to the
Author.) The child ought to be prevented from drinking as much as he has
been in the habit of doing; let him be encouraged to exercise himself
well in the open air; and let strict regard be paid to his diet.

244. _What are the best aperients for a child?_

If it be _actually_ necessary to give him opening medicine, one or two
teaspoonfuls of syrup of senna, repeated if necessary, in four hours,
will generally answer the purpose; or, for a change, one or two
teaspoonfuls of castor oil may be substituted. Lenitive electuary
(compound confection of senna) is another excellent aperient for the
young, it being mild in its operation, and pleasant to take; a child
fancying it is nothing more than jam, and which it much resembles both
in appearance and in taste. The dose is half or one teaspoonful early in
the morning occasionally. Senna is an admirable aperient for a child,
and is a safe one, which is more than can be said of many others. It is
worthy of note that “the taste of senna may be concealed by sweetening
the infusion, adding milk, and drinking as ordinary tea, which, when
thus prepared, it much resembles.” Infusion of senna may be procured of
any respectable druggist. It will take about one or two tablespoonfuls,
or even more, of the infusion (according to the age of the child and the
obstinacy of the bowels), to act as an aperient. Of course you yourself
will be able, from time to time, as the need arises, to add the milk and
the sugar, and thus to make it palatable. It ought to be given warm, so
as the more to resemble tea. Honey, too, is a nice aperient for a
child—a teaspoonful ought to be given either by itself, or spread on a
slice of bread.

Some mothers are in the habit of giving their children jalap
gingerbread. I do not approve of it, as jalap is a drastic griping
purgative; besides, jalap is very nasty to take—nothing will make it
palatable.

Fluid magnesia—solution of the bicarbonate of magnesia—is a good
aperient for a child; and, as it has very little taste, is readily
given, more especially if made palatable by the addition either of a
little syrup or of brown sugar. The advantages which it has over the old
solid form are, that it is colorless and nearly tasteless, and never
forms concretions in the bowels, as the _solid_ magnesia, if persevered
in for any length of time, sometimes does. A child two or three years
old may take one or two tablespoonfuls of the fluid, either by itself or
in his food, repeating it every four hours until the bowels be opened.
When the child is old enough to drink the draught off _immediately_, the
addition of one or two teaspoonfuls of lemon-juice, to each dose of the
fluid magnesia, makes a pleasant effervescing draught, and increases its
efficacy as an aperient.

Bran-bread and _treacle_ will frequently open the bowels; and as treacle
is wholesome, it may be substituted for butter when the bowels are
inclined to be costive. One part of bran to three parts of flour, mixed
together and made into bread. A roasted apple, eaten with _raw_ sugar,
is another excellent mild aperient for a child. Milk gruel—that is to
say, milk thickened with oatmeal—forms an excellent food for him, and
often keeps his bowels regular, and thus (_which is a very important
consideration_) supersedes the necessity of giving him an aperient. An
orange (taking care he does not eat the peel or the pulp), or a fig
after dinner, or a few Muscatel raisins, will frequently regulate the
bowels.

Stewed prunes is another admirable remedy for the costiveness of a
child. The manner of stewing them is as follows: Put a pound of prunes
in a brown jar, add two tablespoonfuls of _raw_ sugar, then cover the
prunes and the sugar with cold water; place them in the oven, and let
them stew for four hours. A child should every morning eat half a dozen
or a dozen of them, until the bowels be relieved, taking care that he
does not swallow the stones.

A suppository is a mild and ready way of opening the bowels of a child.
When he is two or three years old and upwards, a _candle_ suppository is
better than a _soap_ suppository. The way of preparing it is as follows:
Cut a piece of dip-tallow candle—the length of three inches—and insert
it as you would a clyster pipe, about two inches up the fundament,
allowing the remaining inch to be in sight, and there let the
suppository remain until the bowels be opened.

245. _What are the most frequent causes of Protrusion of the lower
bowel?_

The too common and reprehensible practice of a parent administering
frequent aperients, especially calomel and jalap, to her child. Another
cause, is allowing him to remain for a quarter of an hour or more at a
time on his chair; this induces him to strain, and to force the gut
down.

246. _What are the remedies?_

If the protrusion of the bowel have been brought on by the abuse of
aperients, abstain for the future from giving them; but if medicine be
absolutely required, give the mildest—such as either syrup of senna or
castor oil—_and the less of those the better_.

If the _external_ application of a purgative will have the desired
effect, it will, in such cases, be better than the _internal_
administration of aperients. Dr. Merriman’s Purgative Liniment is a good
one for the purpose. (See question 95.) Let the bowels be well rubbed
every night and morning, for five minutes at a time, with the liniment.

A wet compress to the bowels will frequently open them, and will thus do
away with the necessity of giving an aperient—_a most important
consideration_. Fold a napkin in six thicknesses, soak it in _cold_
water, and apply it to the bowels, over which put either a thin covering
or sheet of gutta-percha, or a piece of oiled silk; keep it in its place
with a broad flannel roller, and let it remain on the bowels for three
or four hours, or until they be opened.

Try what diet will do, as opening the bowels by a regulated diet is far
preferable to the giving of aperients. Let him have either bran-bread,
Robinson’s Patent Groats made into gruel with new milk, or Du Barry’s
Arabica Revalenta, or a slice of Huntley and Palmer’s lump gingerbread.
Let him eat stewed prunes, stewed rhubarb, roasted apples, strawberries,
raspberries, the inside of grapes and gooseberries, figs, etc. Give him
early every morning a draught of _cold_ water.

Let me, again, urge you _not_ to give aperients in these cases, or in
any case, unless you are absolutely compelled. By following my advice
you will save yourself an immense deal of trouble, and your child a long
catalogue of misery. Again, I say, look well into the matter, and
whenever it be practicable, avoid purgatives.

Now, with regard to the best manner of returning the bowel, lay the
child upon the bed on his face and bowels, with his hips a little
raised; then smear lard on the forefinger of your right hand (taking
care that the nail be cut close) and gently with your forefinger press
the bowel into its proper place.

Remember, if the above methods be observed, you cannot do the slightest
injury to the bowel, and the sooner it be returned the better it will be
for the child; for, if the bowel be allowed to remain long down, it may
slough or mortify, and death may ensue. The nurse, every time he has a
motion, must see that the bowel does not come down, and if it does, she
ought instantly to return it. Moreover, the nurse should be careful
_not_ to allow the child to remain on his chair more than two or three
minutes at a time.

Another excellent remedy for the protrusion of the lower bowel is to use
every morning a cold salt and water sitz bath. There need not be more
than a depth of three inches of water in the bath; a small handful of
table salt should be dissolved in the water; a dash of warm water in the
winter time must be added to take off the extreme chill, and the child
ought not to be allowed to sit in the bath for more than one minute, or
while the mother can count a hundred, taking care the while to throw
either a square of flannel or a small shawl over his shoulders. The sitz
bath ought to be continued for months, or until the complaint be
removed. I cannot speak in too high praise of these baths.

247. _Do you advise me, every spring and fall, to give my child
brimstone to purify and sweeten his blood, and as a preventive
medicine?_

Certainly not: if you wish to take away his appetite and to weaken and
depress him, give him brimstone! Brimstone is not a remedy fit for a
child’s stomach. The principal use and value of brimstone is as an
external application in itch, and as an internal remedy, mixed with
other laxatives, in piles—piles being a complaint of adults. In olden
times poor unfortunate children were dosed every spring and fall with
brimstone and treacle, to sweeten their blood! Fortunately for the
present race, there is not so much of that folly practiced, but still
there is room for improvement.

To dose a _healthy_ child with physic is the grossest absurdity. No, the
less physic a delicate child has the better it will be for him, but
physic to a healthy child is downright poison!—and brimstone of all
medicines! It is both weakening and depressing to the system, and by
opening the pores of the skin and by relaxing the bowels, is likely to
give cold, and thus to make a healthy a sickly child. Sweeten his blood!
It is more likely to weaken his blood, and thus to make his blood
impure! Blood is not made pure by drugs, but by Nature’s medicine: by
exercise, by pure air, by wholesome diet, by sleep in a well-ventilated
apartment, by regular and thorough ablution. Brimstone a preventive
medicine! Preventive medicine—and brimstone especially in the guise of a
preventive medicine—is “a mockery, a delusion, and a snare.”

248. _When a child is delicate, and his body, without any assignable
cause is gradually wasting away, and the stomach rejects all food that
is taken, what plan can be adopted likely to support his strength, and
thus, probably, be the means of saving his life?_

I have seen, in such a case, great benefit to arise from half a
teacupful of either strong mutton broth, or of strong beef-tea, used as
an enema, every four hours. An enema apparatus is an important requisite
in every nursery; it may be procured of any respectable surgical
instrument-maker. The india-rubber enema bottle is, for a child’s use, a
great improvement on the old syringe, as it is not so likely to get out
of order, and, moreover, is more easily used.

It should be administered slowly, in order that it may remain in the
bowel. If the child be sinking, either a dessertspoonful of brandy, or
half a wineglassful of port wine ought to be added to each enema.

The above plan ought only to be adopted if there be _no_ diarrhœa. If
there be diarrhœa, an enema must _not_ be used. Then, provided there be
great wasting away, and extreme exhaustion, and other remedies having
failed, it would be advisable to give, by the mouth, _raw_ beef of the
finest quality, which ought to be taken from the hipbone, and should be
shredded very fine. All fat and skin must be carefully removed. One or
two teaspoonfuls (according to the age of the child) ought to be given
every four hours. The giving of _raw_ meat to children in exhaustive
diseases, such as excessive long-standing diarrhœa, was introduced into
practice by a Russian physician, a Professor Weisse, of St. Petersburg.
It certainly is, in these cases, a most valuable remedy, and has
frequently been the means of snatching such patients from the jaws of
death. Children usually take raw meat with avidity and with a relish.

249. _If a child be naturally delicate, what plan would you recommend to
strengthen him?_

I should advise strict attention to the rules above mentioned, and
_change of air_—more especially, if it be possible, to the coast. Change
of air, sometimes, upon a delicate child, acts like magic, and may
restore him to health when all other means have failed. If a girl be
delicate, “carry her off to the farm, there to undergo the discipline of
new milk, brown bread, early hours, no lessons, and romps in the
hay-field.” This advice is, of course, equally applicable for a delicate
boy, as delicate boys and delicate girls ought to be treated alike.
Unfortunately, in these very enlightened days! there is too great a
distinction made in the respective management and treatment of boys and
girls.

The best medicines for a delicate child will be the wine of iron and
cod-liver oil. Give them combined in the manner I shall advise when
speaking of the treatment of Rickets.

In diseases of long standing, and that resist the usual remedies, there
is nothing like _change of air_. Hippocrates, the father of medicine,
says:

        “In longis morbis solum mutare,”
        (In tedious diseases to change the place of residence.)

A child who, in the winter, is always catching cold, whose life during
half of the year is one continued catarrh, who is in consequence likely,
if he grow up at all, to grow up a confirmed invalid, ought, during the
winter months, to seek another clime; and if the parents can afford the
expense, they should, at the beginning of October, cause him to bend his
steps to the south of Europe—Mentone being as good a place as they could
probably fix upon.

250. _Do you approve of sea bathing for a delicate young child?_

No: he is frequently so frightened by it that the alarm would do him
more harm than the bathing would do him good. The better plan would be
to have him every morning well sponged, especially his back and loins,
with sea water; and to have him as much as possible carried on the
beach, in order that he may inhale the sea breezes.

When he be older, and is not frightened at being dipped, sea bathing
will be very beneficial to him. If bathing is to do good, either to an
adult or to a child, it must be anticipated with pleasure, and neither
with dread nor with distaste.

251. _What is the best method of administering medicine to a child?_

If he be old enough, appeal to his reason; for, if a mother endeavor to
deceive her child, and he detect her, he will for the future suspect
her.

If he be too young to be reasoned with, then, if he will not take his
medicine, he must be compelled. Lay him across your knees, let both his
hands and his nose be tightly held, and then, by means of the patent
medicine-spoon, or, if that be not at hand, by either a tea or a
dessertspoon, pour the medicine down his throat, and he will be obliged
to swallow it.

It may be said that this is a cruel procedure; but it is the only way to
compel an unruly child to take physic, and is much less cruel than
running the risk of his dying from the medicine not having been
administered.

If any of my medical brethren should perchance read these Conversations,
I respectfully and earnestly recommend them to take more pains in making
medicines for children pleasant and palatable. I am convinced that, in
the generality of instances, provided a little more care and thought
were bestowed on the subject, it may be done; and what an amount of both
trouble and annoyance it would save! It is really painful to witness the
struggles and cries of a child when _nauseous_ medicine is to be given;
the passion and the excitement often do more harm than the medicine does
good.

252. _Ought a sick child to be roused from his sleep to give him physic,
when it is time for him to take it?_

On no account, as sleep, being a natural restorative, must not be
interfered with. A mother cannot be too particular in administering the
medicine, at stated periods, while he is awake.

253. _Have you any remarks to make on the management of a sick-room, and
have you any directions to give on the nursing of a sick child?_

In sickness select a large and lofty room; if in the town, the back of
the house will be preferable—in order to keep the patient free from
noise and bustle—as a sick-chamber cannot be kept too quiet. Be sure
that there be a chimney in the room—as there ought to be in _every_ room
in the house—and that it be not stopped, as it will help to carry off
the impure air of the apartment. Keep the chamber _well ventilated_, by,
from time to time, opening the window. The air of the apartment cannot
be too pure; therefore, let the evacuations from the bowels be instantly
removed, either to a distant part of the house, or to an out-house, or
to the cellar, as it might be necessary to keep them for the medical
man’s inspection.

Let there be a frequent change of linen, as in sickness it is even more
necessary than in health, more especially if the complaint be fever. In
an attack of fever clean sheets ought, every other day, to be put on the
bed; clean body-linen every day. A frequent change of linen in sickness
is most refreshing.

If the complaint be fever, a fire in the grate will not be necessary.
Should it be a case either of inflammation of the lungs or of the chest,
a small fire in the winter time is desirable, keeping the temperature of
the room as nearly as possible at 60° Fahrenheit. Bear in mind that a
large fire in a sick-room cannot be too strongly condemned; for if there
be fever—and there are scarcely any complaints without—a large fire only
increases it. Small fires, in cases either of inflammation of the lungs
or of the chest, in the winter time, encourage ventilation of the
apartment, and thus carry off impure air. If it be summer time, of
course fires would be improper. A thermometer is an indispensable
requisite in a sick-room.

In fever, free and thorough ventilation is of vital importance, more
especially in scarlet fever; then a patient cannot have too much air; in
scarlet fever, for the first few days the windows, be it winter or
summer, must to the widest extent be opened. The fear of the patient
catching cold by doing so is one of the numerous prejudices and baseless
fears that haunt the nursery, and the sooner it is exploded the better
it will be for human life. The valances and bed-curtains ought to be
removed, and there should be as little furniture in the room as
possible.

If it be a case of measles, it will be necessary to adopt a different
course; then the windows ought not to be opened, but the door must from
time to time be left ajar. In a case of measles, if it be winter time, a
_small_ fire in the room will be necessary. In inflammation of the lungs
or of the chest, the windows should not be opened, but the door ought
occasionally to be left unfastened, in order to change the air and to
make it pure. Remember, then, that ventilation, either by open window or
by open door, is most necessary in all diseases. Ventilation is one of
the best friends a doctor has.

In fever, do not load the bed with clothes; in the summer a sheet is
sufficient, in the winter a sheet and a blanket.

In fever, do not be afraid of allowing the patient plenty either of cold
water or of cold toast and water; Nature will tell him when he has had
enough. In measles, let the chill be taken off the toast and water.

In _croup_, have always ready a plentiful supply of hot water, in case a
warm bath might be required.

In _child-crowing_, have always in the sick-room a supply of cold water,
ready at a moment’s notice to dash upon the face.

In fever, do not let the little patient lie on the lap; he will rest
more comfortably on a horse-hair mattress in his crib or cot. If he have
pain in the bowels, the lap is most agreeable to him: the warmth of the
body, either of the mother or of the nurse, soothes him; besides, if he
be on the lap, he can be turned on his stomach and on his bowels, which
often affords him great relief and comfort. If he be much emaciated,
when he is nursed, place a pillow upon the lap and let him lie upon it.

In _head affections_, darken the room with a _green_ calico blind; keep
the chamber more than usually quiet; let what little talking is
necessary be carried on in whispers, but the less of that the better;
and in _head affections_, never allow smelling salts to be applied to
the nose, as they only increase the flow of blood to the head, and
consequently do harm.

It is often a good sign when a child, who is seriously ill, suddenly
becomes cross. It is then he begins to feel his weakness, and to give
vent to his feelings. “Children are almost always cross when recovering
from an illness, however patient they may have been during its severest
moments, and the phenomenon is not by any means confined to children.”

A sick child must _not_ be stuffed with _much_ food at a time. He will
take either a tablespoonful of new milk or a tablespoonful of
chicken-broth every half hour, with greater advantage than a teacupful
of either the one or the other every four hours, which large quantity
would very probably be rejected from his stomach, and may cause the
unfortunately treated child to die of starvation!

If a sick child be peevish, attract his attention either by a toy or by
an ornament; if he be cross, win him over to good humor by love,
affection, and caresses, but let it be done gently and without noise. Do
not let visitors see him; they will only excite, distract, and irritate
him, and help to consume the oxygen of the atmosphere, and thus rob the
air of its exhilarating health-giving qualities and purity; a sick-room,
therefore, is not a proper place either for visitors or for gossips.

In selecting a sick-nurse, let her be gentle, patient, cheerful, quiet,
and kind, but firm withal; she ought to be neither old nor young; if she
be old, she is often garrulous and prejudiced, and thinks too much of
her trouble; if she be young, she is frequently thoughtless and noisy;
therefore choose a middle-aged women. Do not let there be in the
sick-room more than, besides the mother, one efficient nurse; a great
number can be of no service—they will only be in each other’s way, and
will distract the patient.

Let stillness, especially if the head be the part affected, reign in a
sick-room. Nurses at these times ought to wear slippers, and not shoes.
Creaking shoes and rustling silk dresses ought not to be worn in
sick-chambers—they are quite out of place there. If the child be asleep,
or if he be dozing, perfect stillness must be enjoined, not even a
whisper should be heard:

                   “In the sick-room be calm,
                     Move gently and with care,
                   Lest any jar or sudden noise
                     Come sharply unaware.

                   You cannot tell the harm,
                     The mischief it may bring,
                   To wake the sick one suddenly,
                     Besides the suffering.

                   The broken sleep excites
                     Fresh pain, increased distress;
                   The quiet slumber undisturb’d
                     Soothes pain and restlessness.

                   Sleep is the gift of God:
                     Oh! bear these words at heart,—
                   ‘He giveth his beloved sleep,’
                     And gently do thy part.”

If there be other children, let them be removed to a distant part of the
house; or, if the disease be of an infectious nature, let them be sent
away from home altogether.

In all illnesses—and bear in mind the following is most important
advice—a child must be encouraged to try and make water, whether he ask
or not, at least four times during the twenty-four hours; and at any
other time, if he expresses the slightest inclination to do so. I have
known a little fellow to hold his water, to his great detriment, for
twelve hours, because either the mother had in her trouble forgotten to
inquire, or the child himself was either too ill or too indolent to make
the attempt.

See that the medical man’s directions are, to the very letter, carried
out. Do not fancy that you know better than he does, otherwise you have
no business to employ him. Let him, then, have your implicit confidence
and your exact obedience. What _you_ may consider to be a trifling
matter, may frequently be of the utmost importance, and may sometimes
decide whether the case shall either end in life or death!

_Lice._—It is not very poetical, as many of the grim facts of everyday
life are not, but, unlike a great deal of poetry, it is unfortunately
too true that after a severe and dangerous illness, especially after a
bad attack of fever, a child’s head frequently becomes infested with
vermin—with lice! It therefore behooves a mother herself to thoroughly
examine, by means of a fine-tooth comb, her child’s head, in order to
satisfy her mind that there be no vermin there. A fine-tooth comb ought
_not_ to be used at any other time except for the purpose of
examination, as the constant use of a fine-tooth comb would scratch the
scalp, and would encourage a quantity of scurf to accumulate. As soon as
he be well enough, he ought to resume his regular ablutions—that is to
say, that he must go again regularly into his tub, and have his head
every morning thoroughly washed with soap and water. A mother ought to
be particular in seeing that the nurse washes the hair brush at least
once every week; if she does not do so, the dirty brush which had,
during the illness, been used, might contain the “nits,”—the eggs of the
lice,—and would thus propagate the vermin, as they will, when on the
head of the child, soon hatch. If there be already lice on the head, in
addition to the regular washing every morning with the soap and water,
and after the head has been thoroughly dried, let the hair be well and
plentifully dressed with camphorated oil—the oil being allowed to remain
on until the next washing on the following morning. Lice cannot live in
oil (more especially if, as in camphorated oil, camphor be dissolved in
it), and as the camphorated oil will not, in the slightest degree,
injure the hair, it is the best application that can be used. But as
soon as the vermin have disappeared, let the oil be discontinued, as the
_natural_ oil of the hair is, at other times, the only oil that is
required on the head.

The “nit”—the egg of the louse—might be distinguished from scurf
(although to the _naked_ eye it is very much like it in appearance) by
the former fastening firmly on one of the hairs as a barnacle would on a
rock, and by it not being readily brushed off as scurf would, which
latter (scurf) is always loose.

254. _My child, in the summer time, is much tormented with fleas: what
are the best remedies?_

A small muslin bag, filled with camphor, placed in the cot or bed, will
drive fleas away. Each flea-bite should, from time to time, be dressed
by means of a camel’s-hair brush, with a drop or two of spirit of
camphor, an ounce bottle of which ought, for the purpose, to be procured
from a chemist. Camphor is also an excellent remedy to prevent bugs from
biting. Bugs and fleas have a horror of camphor; and well they might,
for it is death to them!

There is a famous remedy for the destruction of fleas, manufactured in
France, entitled “_La Poudre Insecticide_,” which, although perfectly
harmless to the human economy, is utterly destructive to fleas. Bugs are
best destroyed by oil of turpentine; the places they do love to
congregate in should be well saturated, by means of a brush, with the
oil of turpentine. A few dressings will effectually destroy both them
and their young ones.

255. _Suppose a child to have had an attack either of inflammation of
the lungs or of bronchitis, and to be much predisposed to a return: what
precautions would you take to prevent either the one or the other for
the future?_

I would recommend him to wear fine flannel instead of lawn shirts; to
wear good lamb’s-wool stockings _above the knees_, and good, strong, dry
shoes to his feet; to live, weather permitting, a great part of every
day in the open air; to strengthen his system by good nourishing food—by
an abundance of both milk and meat (the former especially); to send him,
in the autumn, for a couple of months, to the sea-side; to administer to
him, from time to time, cod-liver oil; in short, to think only of his
health, and to let learning, until he be stronger, be left alone.

I also advise either table salt or bay salt to be added to the water in
which the child is washed with in the morning, in a similar manner as
recommended in answer to the 123d question.

256. _Then do you not advise such a child to be confined within doors?_

If any inflammation be present, or if he have but just recovered from
one, it would be improper to send him into the open air, but not
otherwise, as the fresh air would be a likely means of strengthening the
lungs, and thereby of preventing an attack of inflammation for the
future. Besides, the more a child is coddled within doors, the more
likely will he be to catch cold, and to renew the inflammation. If the
weather be cold, yet neither wet nor damp, he ought to be sent out, but
let him be well clothed; and the nurse should have strict injunctions
_not_ to stand about entries, or in any draughts—indeed, not to stand
about at all, but to keep walking about all the time she is in the open
air. Unless you have a trustworthy nurse, it will be well for you either
to accompany her in her walk with your child, or merely to allow her to
walk with him in the garden, as you can then keep your eye upon both of
them.

257. _If a child be either chicken-breasted, or if he be narrow-chested,
are there any means of expanding and of strengthening his chest?_

Learning ought to be put out of the question; attention must be paid to
his health alone, or consumption will probably mark him as its own! Let
him live as much as possible in the open air; if it be country, so much
the better. Let him rise early in the morning, and let him go to bed
betimes; and if he be old enough to use the dumb-bells, or, what is
better, an india-rubber chest expander, he should do so daily. He ought
also to be encouraged to use two short sticks, similar to, but heavier
than, a policeman’s staff, and to go, every morning, through regular
exercises with them. As soon as he be old enough, let him have lessons
from a drill-sergeant and from a dancing-master. Let him be made both to
walk and to sit upright, and let him be kept as much as possible upon a
milk diet, and give him as much as he can eat of fresh meat every day.
Where milk does not agree, it may generally be made to do so by the
addition of one part of lime-water to seven parts of new milk. Moreover,
the lime will be of service in hardening his bones; and in these cases,
the bones require hardening. Cod-liver oil, a teaspoonful or a
dessertspoonful, according to his age, twice a day, is serviceable in
these cases. Stimulants ought to be carefully avoided. In short, let
every means be used to nourish, to strengthen, and invigorate the
system, without at the same time creating fever. Such a child should be
a child of nature; he ought almost to live in the open air, and throw
his books to the winds. Of what use is learning without health? In such
a case as this you cannot have both.

258. _If a child be round-shouldered, or if either of his
shoulder-blades have “grown out,” what had better be done?_

Many children have either round shoulders, or have their shoulder-blades
grown out, or have their spines twisted, from growing too fast, from
being allowed to slouch in their gait, and from not having sufficient
nourishing food, such as meat and milk, to support them while the rapid
growth of childhood is going on.

If your child be affected as above described, nourish him well on milk
and on farinaceous food, and on meat once a day, but let milk be his
staple diet; he ought, during the twenty-four hours, to take two or
three pints of new milk. He should almost live in the open air, and must
have plenty of play. If you can so contrive it, let him live in the
country. When tired, let him lie, for half an hour, two or three times
daily, flat on his back on the carpet. Let him rest at night on a
horse-hair mattress, and not on a feather bed.

Let him have every morning, if it be summer, a thorough cold water
ablution; if it be winter, let the water be made tepid. Let either two
handfuls of table salt or a handful of bay salt be dissolved in the
water. Let the salt and water stream well over his shoulders and down
his back and loins. Let him be well dried with a moderately coarse
towel, and then let his back be well rubbed, and his shoulders be thrown
back—exercising them, much in the same manner as in skipping, for five
or ten minutes at a time. Skipping, by-the-by, is of great use in these
cases, whether the child be either a boy or a girl—using, of course, the
rope backward, and not forward.

Let books be utterly discarded until his shoulders have become strong,
and thus no longer round, and his shoulder-blades have become straight.
It is a painful sight to see a child stoop like an old man.

Let him have twice daily a teaspoonful or a dessertspoonful (according
to his age) of cod-liver oil.

When he is old enough, let the drill-sergeant give him regular lessons,
and let the dancing-master be put in requisition. Let him go through
regular gymnastic exercises, provided they are not of a violent
character.

But, bear in mind, let there be in these cases no mechanical
restraints—no shoulder-straps, no abominable stays. Make him straight by
natural means—by making him strong. Mechanical means would only, by
weakening and wasting the muscles, increase the mischief, and thus the
deformity. In this world of ours there is too much reliance placed on
artificial, and too little on natural means of cure.

259. _What are the causes of Bow Legs in a child; and what is the
treatment?_

Weakness of constitution, poor and insufficient nourishment, and putting
a child, more especially a fat and heavy one, on his legs too early.

_Treatment._—Nourishing food, such as an abundance of milk, and, if he
be old enough, of meat; iron medicines; cod-liver oil; thorough
ablution, every morning, of the whole body; an abundance of exercise
either on pony, or on donkey, or in carriage, but not, until his legs be
stronger, on foot. If they are much bowed, it will be necessary to
consult an experienced surgeon.

260. _If a child while asleep, “wet his bed,” is there any method of
preventing him from doing so?_

Let him be held out just before he himself goes to bed, and again when
the family retires to rest. If, at the time, he be asleep, he will
become so accustomed to it that he will, without awaking, make water. He
ought to be made to lie on his side; for, if he be put on his back, the
urine will rest upon an irritable part of the bladder, and, if he be
inclined to wet his bed, he will not be able to avoid doing so. He must
not be allowed to drink much with his meals, especially with his supper.
Wetting the bed is an infirmity with some children—they cannot help it.
It is, therefore, cruel to scold and chastise them for it. Occasionally,
however, wetting the bed arises from idleness, in which case, of course,
a little wholesome correction might be necessary.

A water-proof cloth, or bed-sheeting, as it is sometimes called—one yard
by three-quarters of a yard—will effectually preserve the bed from being
wetted, and ought always, on these occasions, to be used.

A mother ought, every morning, to ascertain for herself whether her
child have wet his bed; if he have, and if unfortunately the water-proof
cloth have not been used, the mattress, sheets, and blankets must be
instantly taken to the kitchen fire and be properly dried. Inattention
to the above has frequently caused a child to suffer, either from a
cold, from a fever, or from an inflammation; not only so, but if they be
not dried, he is wallowing in filth and in an offensive effluvium. If
both mother and nurse were more attentive to their duties—in frequently
holding a child out, whether he asks or not—a child wetting his bed
would be the exception, and not, as it frequently is, the rule. If a
child be dirty, you may depend upon it the right persons to blame are
the mother and the nurse, and not the child!

261. _If a child should catch Small-pox, what are the best means to
prevent pitting?_

He ought to be desired neither to pick nor to rub the pustules. If he be
too young to attend to these directions, his hands must be secured in
bags (just large enough to hold them), which bags should be fastened
round the wrists. The nails must be cut very close.

Cream smeared by means of a feather, frequently in the day, on the
pustules, affords great comfort and benefit. Tripe-liquor has, for the
same purpose, been strongly recommended. I, myself, in several cases
have tried it, and with the happiest results. It is most soothing,
comforting, and healing to the skin.

262. _Can you tell me of any plan to prevent Chilblains, or, if a child
be suffering from them, to cure them?_

_First, then, the way to prevent them._—Let a child, who is subject to
them, wear, in the winter time, a square piece of wash-leather over the
toes, a pair of warm lamb’s-wool stockings, and good shoes; but, above
all, let him be encouraged to run about the house as much as possible,
especially before going to bed; and on no account allow him either to
warm his feet before the fire, or to bathe them in _hot_ water. If the
feet be cold, and the child be too young to take exercise, then let them
be well rubbed with the warm hand. If adults suffer from chilblains, I
have found friction, night and morning, with horse-hair flesh-gloves,
the best means of preventing them.

_Secondly, the way to cure them._—_If they be unbroken_, let them be
well rubbed, every night and morning, with spirits of turpentine and
camphorated oil, first shaking the bottle, and then let them be covered
with a piece of lint, over which a piece of wash-leather should be
placed.

              Take of—Spirits of Turpentine, three drachms;
                       Camphorated Oil, nine drachms:

  Mix for a Liniment. For an adult, four drachms of the former, and
  eight of the latter, may be used. If the child be young, or if the
  skin be very tender, the camphorated oil may be used without the
  turpentine.

“An excellent chilblain remedy is made by shaking well together, in a
bottle, spirits of turpentine, white vinegar, and the contents of an
egg, in equal proportion. With this the chilblains should be rubbed
gently whenever they are in a state of irritation, and until the
swelling and redness are dissipated.”

_If they be broken_, let a piece of lint be spread with spermaceti
cerate, and be applied, every morning, to the part, and let a
white-bread poultice be used every night.

263. _During the winter time my child’s hands, legs, etc., chap very
much: what ought I to do?_

Let a teacupful of bran be tied up in a muslin bag, and be put, over
night, into either a large water-can or jug of _rain_ water; and let
this water from the can or jug be the water he is to be washed with on
the following morning, and every morning until the chaps be cured.
_Rain_ water ought _always_ to be used in the washing of a child; pump
water is likely to chap the skin, and to make it both rough and
irritable. As often as water is withdrawn, either from the water-can or
from the jug, let fresh rain water take its place, in order that the
bran may be constantly soaking in it. The bran in the bag should be
renewed about twice a week.

Take particular care to dry the skin well every time he be washed; then,
after each ablution, as well as every night at bedtime, rub a piece of
deer’s suet over the parts affected: a few dressings will perform a
cure. The deer’s suet may be bought at any of the shops where venison is
sold. Another excellent remedy is glycerin, which should be smeared, by
means of the finger or by a camel’s-hair brush, on the parts affected,
two or three times a day. If the child be very young, it might be
necessary to dilute the glycerin with rose-water: fill a small bottle
one-third with glycerin, and fill up the remaining two-thirds of the
bottle with rose-water—shaking the bottle every time just before using
it. The best soap to use for chapped hands is the glycerin soap: no
other being required.

264. _What is the best remedy for Chapped Lips?_

Cold-cream (which may be procured of any respectable chemist) is an
excellent application for _chapped lips_. It ought, by means of the
finger, to be frequently smeared on the parts affected.

265. _Have the goodness to inform me of the different varieties of Worms
that infest a child’s bowels?_

Principally three—1, The tape-worm; 2, the long round-worm; and 3, the
most frequent of all, the common thread or maw-worm. The tape-worm
infests the whole course of the bowels, both small and large: the long
round-worm, principally the small bowels, occasionally the stomach; it
sometimes crawls out of the child’s mouth, causing alarm to the mother;
there is, of course, no danger in its doing so: the common thread-worm
or maw-worm infests the rectum or fundament.

266. _What are the causes of Worms?_

The causes of worms are—weak bowels; bad and improper food, such as
unripe, unsound, or uncooked fruit, and much green vegetables; pork,
especially underdone pork; an abundance of sweets; the neglecting of
giving salt in the food. One frequent, if not the most frequent, cause
of tape-worm is the eating of pork, more especially if it be underdone.
_Underdone_ pork is the most unwholesome food that can be eaten, and is
the most frequent cause of tape-worm known. _Underdone_ beef also gives
tape-worm; let the meat, therefore, be well and properly cooked. These
facts ought to be borne in mind, as prevention is always better than
cure.

267. _What are the symptoms and the treatment of Worms?_

_The symptoms_ of worms are—emaciation; itching and picking of the nose;
a dark mark under the eyes; grating, during sleep, of the teeth;
starting in the sleep; foul breath; furred tongue; uncertain
appetite—sometimes voracious, at other times bad, the little patient
sitting down very hungry to his dinner, and before scarcely tasting a
mouthful, the appetite vanishing; large bowels; colicky pains of the
bowels; slimy motions; itching of the fundament. Tape-worm and
round-worm, more especially the former, are apt, in children, to produce
convulsions. Tape-worm is very weakening to the constitution, and
usually causes great emaciation and general ill health; the sooner
therefore it is expelled from the bowels the better it will be for the
patient.

Many of the obscure diseases of children arise from worms. In all
doubtful cases, therefore, this fact should be borne in mind, in order
that a thorough investigation may be instituted.

With regard to _treatment_, a medical man ought, of course, to be
consulted. He will soon use means both to dislodge them, and to prevent
a future recurrence of them.

Let me caution a mother never to give her child patent medicines for the
destruction of worms. There is one favorite quack powder, which is
composed principally of large doses of calomel, and which is quite as
likely to destroy the patient as the worms! No, if your child have
worms, put him under the care of a judicious medical man, who will soon
expel them, without, at the same time, injuring health and constitution!

268. _How may Worms be prevented from infesting a child’s bowels?_

Worms generally infest _weak_ bowels; hence, the moment a child becomes
strong worms cease to exist. The reason why a child is so subject to
them is owing to the improper food which is usually given to him. When
he be stuffed with unsound and with unripe fruits, with much sweets,
with rich puddings, and with pastry, and when he is oftentimes allowed
to eat his meat _without_ salt, and to _bolt_ his food without chewing
it, is there any wonder that he should suffer from worms? The way to
prevent them is to avoid such things, and, at the same time, to give him
plenty of salt to his _fresh_ and well-cooked meat. Salt strengthens and
assists digestion, and is absolutely necessary to the human economy.
Salt is emphatically a worm-destroyer. The truth of this statement may
be readily tested by sprinkling a little salt on the common earth-worm.
“What a comfort and real requisite to human life is salt! It enters into
the constituents of the human blood, and to do without it is wholly
impossible.” To do without it is wholly impossible! These are true
words. Look well to it, therefore, ye mothers, and beware of the
consequences of neglecting such advice, and see for yourselves that your
children regularly eat salt with their food. If they neglect eating salt
with their food, they _must, of necessity, have worms_, and worms that
will eventually injure them and make them miserable.

269. _You have a great objection to the frequent administration of
aperient medicines to a child: can you devise any method to prevent
their use?_

Although we can scarcely call constipation a disease, yet it sometimes
leads to disease. The frequent giving of aperients only adds to the
stubbornness of the bowels.

I have generally found a draught, early every morning, of _cold_ pump
water, the eating either of loaf gingerbread or of oatmeal gingerbread,
a variety of animal and vegetable food, ripe sound fruit, Muscatel
raisins, a fig, or an orange after dinner, and, when he be old enough,
_coffee_ and milk instead of _tea_ and milk, to have the desired effect,
more especially if, for a time, aperients be studiously avoided.

270. _Have you any remarks to make on Rickets?_

Rickets is owing to a want of a sufficient quantity of earthy matter in
the bones; hence the bones bend and twist, and lose their shape, causing
deformity. Rickets generally begins to show itself between the first and
second years of a child’s life. Such children are generally late in
cutting their teeth, and when the teeth do come, they are bad, deficient
of enamel, discolored, and readily decay. A rickety child is generally
stunted in stature; he has a large head, with overhanging forehead, or
what nurses call a watery-head-shaped forehead. The fontanelles, or
openings of the head as they are called, are a long time in closing. A
rickety child is usually talented; his brain seems to thrive at the
expense of his general health. His breast-bone projects out, and the
sides of his chest are flattened—hence he becomes what is called
chicken-breasted or pigeon-breasted; his spine is usually twisted, so
that he is quite awry, and, in a bad case, he is hump-backed; the ribs,
from the twisted spine, on one side bulge out; he is round-shouldered;
the long bones of his body, being soft, bend; he is bow-legged,
knock-kneed, and weak ankled.

Rickets are of various degrees of intensity, the hump-backed being among
the worst. There are many mild forms of rickets; weak ankles,
knocked-knees, bowed-legs, chicken-breasts, being among the latter
number. Many a child, who is not exactly hump-backed, is very
round-shouldered, which latter is also a mild species of rickets.

Show me a child that is rickety, and I can generally prove that it is
owing to poor living, more especially to poor milk. If milk were always
genuine, and if a child had an abundance of it, my belief is that
rickets would be a very rare disease. The importance of genuine milk is
of national importance. We cannot have a race of strong men and women
unless, as children, they have had a good and plentiful supply of milk.
It is utterly impossible. Milk might well be considered one of the
necessaries of a child’s existence.

Genuine fresh milk, then, is one of the grand preventives, as well as
one of the best remedies, for rickets. Many a child would not now have
to swallow quantities of cod-liver oil if previously he had imbibed
quantities of good genuine milk. An insufficient and a poor supply of
milk in childhood sows the seeds of many diseases, and death often
gathers the fruit. Can it be wondered at, when there is so much poor and
nasty milk in England, that rickets in one shape or another is so
prevalent?

When will mothers arouse from their slumbers, rub their eyes, and see
clearly the importance of the subject? When will they know that all the
symptoms of rickets I have just enumerated _usually_ proceed from the
want of nourishment, more especially from the want of genuine and of an
abundance of milk? There are, of course, other means of warding off
rickets besides an abundance of nourishing food, such as thorough
ablution, plenty of air, exercise, play, and sunshine; but of all these
splendid remedies, nourishment stands at the top of the list.

I do not mean to say that rickets _always_ proceeds from poorness of
living—from poor milk. It sometimes arises from scrofula, and is an
inheritance of one or of both the parents.

Rickety children, if not both carefully watched and managed, frequently,
when they become youths, die of consumption. A mother, who has for some
time neglected the advice I have just given, will often find, to her
grievous cost, that the mischief has, past remedy, been done, and that
it is now “too late!—too late!”

271. _How may a child be prevented from becoming Rickety? or, if he be
Rickety, how ought he to be treated?_

If a child be predisposed to be rickety, or if he be actually rickety,
attend to the following rules:

Let him live well, on good nourishing diet, such as on tender
rump-steaks, cut very fine, and mixed with mashed potatoes, crumb of
bread, and with the gravy of the meat. Let him have, as I have before
advised, an abundance of good new milk—a quart or three pints during
every twenty-four hours. Let him have milk in every form—as milk gruel,
Du Barry’s Arabica revalenta made with milk, batter and rice puddings,
suet-pudding, bread and milk, etc.

_To harden the bones_, let lime-water be added to the milk (a
tablespoonful to each teacupful of milk).

Let him have a good supply of fresh, pure, dry air. He must almost live
in the open air—the country, if practicable, in preference to the town,
and the coast in summer and autumn. Sea bathing and sea breezes are
often, in these cases, of inestimable value.

He ought not, at an early age, to be allowed to bear his weight upon his
legs. He must sleep on a horse-hair mattress, and not on a feather bed.
He should use, every morning, cold baths in the summer, and tepid baths
in the winter, with bay salt (a handful) dissolved in the water.

Friction with the hand must, for half an hour at a time, every night and
morning, be sedulously applied to the back and to the limbs. It is
wonderful how much good in these cases friction does.

Strict attention ought to be paid to the rules of health as laid down in
these Conversations. Whatever is conducive to the general health is
preventive and curative of rickets.

Books, if he be old enough to read them, should be thrown aside; health,
and health alone, must be the one grand object.

The best medicines in these cases are a combination of cod-liver oil and
the wine of iron, given in the following manner: Put a teaspoonful of
wine of iron into a wineglass, half fill the glass with water, sweeten
it with a lump or two of sugar, then let a teaspoonful of cod-liver oil
swim on the top; let the child drink it all down together, twice or
three times a day. An hour after a meal is the _best_ time to give the
medicine, as both iron and cod-liver oil sit better on a _full_ than on
an _empty_ stomach. The child in a short time will become fond of the
above medicine, and will be sorry when it is discontinued.

A case of rickets requires great patience and steady perseverance; let,
therefore, the above plan have a fair and long-continued trial, and I
can then promise that there will be every probability that great benefit
will be derived from it.

272. _If a child be subject to a scabby eruption about the mouth, what
is the best local application?_

Leave it to Nature. Do not, on any account, apply any local application
to heal it; if you do, you may produce injury; you may either bring on
an attack of inflammation, or you may throw him into convulsions. No!
This “breaking-out” is frequently a safety-valve, and must not therefore
be needlessly interfered with. Should the eruption be severe, reduce the
child’s diet; keep him from butter, from gravy, and from fat meat, or,
indeed, for a few days from meat altogether; and give him mild aperient
medicine; but, above all things, do not quack him either with calomel or
with grey powder.

273. _Will you have the goodness to describe the eruption on the face
and on the head of a young child, called Milk-Crust or Running Scall?_

Milk-crust is a complaint of very young children—of those who are
cutting their teeth—and as it is a nasty-looking complaint, and
frequently gives a mother a great deal of trouble, of anxiety, and
annoyance, it will be well that you should know its symptoms, its
causes, and its probable duration.

_Symptoms._—When a child is about nine months or a year old, small
pimples are apt to break out around the ears, on the forehead, and on
the head. These pimples at length become vesicles (that is to say, they
contain water), which run into one large one, break, and form a nasty
dirty-looking yellowish, and sometimes greenish scab, which scab is
moist, indeed, sometimes quite wet, and gives out a disagreeable odor,
and which is sometimes so large on the head as actually to form a
scull-cap, and so extensive on the face as to form a mask! These, I am
happy to say, are rare cases. The child’s beauty is, of course, for a
time completely destroyed, and not only his beauty, but his good temper;
for as the eruption causes great irritation and itching, he is
constantly clawing himself, and crying with annoyance a great part of
the day, and sometimes also of the night, the eruption preventing him
from sleeping. It is not contagious, and soon after he has cut the whole
of his _first_ set of teeth, it will get well, provided it has not been
improperly interfered with.

_Causes._—Irritation from teething; stuffing him with overmuch meat,
thus producing a humor, which Nature tries to get rid of by throwing it
out on the surface of the body, the safest place she could fix on for
the purpose, hence the folly and danger of giving medicines and applying
_external_ applications to drive the eruption in. “Diseased nature
oftentimes breaks forth in strange eruptions,” and cures herself in this
way, if she be not too much interfered with, and if the eruption be not
driven in by injudicious treatment. I have known in such cases
disastrous consequences to follow over-officiousness and meddlesomeness.
Nature is trying all she can to drive the humor out, while some
wiseacres are doing all they can to drive the humor in.

_Duration._—As milk-crust is a tedious affair, and will require a
variety of treatment, it will be necessary to consult an experienced
medical man; and although he will be able to afford great relief, the
child will not, in all probability, be quite free from the eruption
until he has cut the whole of his first set of teeth—until he be upwards
of two years and a half old—when, with judicious and careful treatment,
it will gradually disappear, and eventually leave not a trace behind.

It will be far better to leave the case alone—to get well of itself
rather than to try to cure the complaint either by outward applications
or by strong internal medicines; “the remedy is often worse than the
disease,” of this I am quite convinced.

274. _Have you any advice to give me as to my conduct toward my medical
man?_

Give him your entire confidence. Be truthful and be candid with him.
Tell him the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. Have no
reservations; give him, as near as you can, a plain, unvarnished
statement of the symptoms of the disease. Do not magnify, and do not
make too light of any of them. Be prepared to state the exact time the
child first showed symptoms of illness. If he have had a shivering fit,
however slight, do not fail to tell your medical man of it. Note the
state of the skin; if there be a “breaking-out,” be it ever so trifling,
let it be pointed out to him. Make yourself acquainted with the quantity
and with the appearance of the urine, taking care to have a little of it
saved, in case the doctor may wish to see and examine it. Take notice of
the state of the motions—their number during the twenty-four hours,
their color, their smell, and their consistence, keeping one for his
inspection. Never leave any of these questions to be answered by a
servant; a mother is the proper person to give the necessary and
truthful answers, which answers frequently decide the fate of the
patient. Bear in mind, then, a mother’s untiring care and love,
attention and truthfulness, frequently decide whether, in a serious
illness, the little fellow shall live or die! Fearful responsibility!

A medical man has arduous duties to perform; smoothe, therefore, his
path as much as you can, and you will be amply repaid by the increased
good he will be able to do your child. Strictly obey a doctor’s
orders—in diet, in medicine, in everything. Never throw obstacles in his
way. Never omit any of his suggestions; for depend upon it, that if he
be a sensible man, directions, however slight, ought never to be
neglected; bear in mind, with a judicious medical man,—

                “That nothing walks with aimless feet.”

If the case be severe, requiring a second opinion, never of your own
accord call in a physician without first consulting and advising with
your own medical man. It would be an act of great discourtesy to do so.
Inattention to the foregoing advice has frequently caused injury to the
patient, and heart-burnings and ill-will among doctors.

Speak, in the presence of your child, with respect and kindness of your
medical man, so that the former may look upon the latter as a friend—as
one who will strive, with God’s blessing, to relieve his pain and
suffering. Remember the increased power of doing good the doctor will
have if the child be induced to like, instead of dislike, him. Not only
be careful that you yourself speak before your child respectfully and
kindly of the medical man, but see that your domestics do so likewise;
and take care that they are never allowed to frighten your child, as
many silly servants do, by saying that they will send for the doctor,
who will either give him nasty medicine, or will perform some cruel
operation upon him. A nurse-maid should, then, never for one moment be
permitted to make a doctor an object of terror or of dislike to a child.

Send, whenever it be practicable, for your doctor _early_ in the
morning, as he will then make his arrangements accordingly, and can by
daylight better ascertain the nature of the complaint, more especially
if it be a skin disease. It is utterly impossible for him to form a
correct opinion of the nature of a “breaking-out” either by gas or by
candle-light. If the illness come on at night, particularly if it be
ushered in either with a severe shivering, or with any other urgent
symptom, no time should be lost, be it night or day, in sending for him.




                              WARM BATHS.


275. _Have the goodness to mention the complaints of a child for which
warm baths are useful?_

1. Convulsions; 2. Pains in the bowels, known by the child drawing up
his legs, screaming violently, etc.; 3. Restlessness from teething; 4.
Flatulence. The warm bath acts as a fomentation to the stomach and the
bowels, and gives ease where the usual remedies do not rapidly relieve.

276. _Will you mention the precautions and the rules to be observed in
putting a child into a warm bath?_

Carefully ascertain before he be immersed in the bath that the water be
neither too hot nor too cold. Carelessness, or over-anxiety to put him
in the water as quickly as possible, has frequently, from his being
immersed in the bath when the water was too hot, caused him great pain
and suffering. From 96 to 98 degrees of Fahrenheit is the proper
temperature of a warm bath. If it be necessary to add fresh warm water,
let him be either removed the while, or let it not be put in when very
hot; for if boiling water be added to increase the heat of the bath, it
naturally ascends, and may scald him. Again, let the fresh water be put
in at as great a distance from him as possible. The usual time for him
to remain in a bath is a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes. Let the
chest and the bowels be rubbed with the hand while he is in the bath.
Let him be immersed in the bath as high up as the neck, taking care that
he be the while supported under the armpits, and that his head be also
rested. As soon as he comes out of the bath he ought to be carefully but
quickly rubbed dry; and, if it be necessary to keep up the action on the
skin, he should be put to bed, between the blankets; or, if the desired
relief has been obtained, between the sheets, which ought to have been
previously warmed, where, most likely, he will fall into a sweet
refreshing sleep.




                      WARM EXTERNAL APPLICATIONS.


277. _In case of a child suffering pain either in his stomach or in his
bowels, or in case he has a feverish cold, can you tell me of the best
way of applying heat to them?_

In pain, either of the stomach or of the bowels, there is nothing
usually affords greater or speedier relief than the _external_
application of heat. The following are four different methods of
applying heat: 1. A bag of hot salt—that is to say, powdered table
salt—put either into the oven or into a frying-pan, and thus made hot,
and placed in a flannel bag, and then applied, as the case may be,
either to the stomach or to the bowels. Hot salt is an excellent remedy
for these pains. 2. An india-rubber hot water bottle, half filled with
hot water—it need not be boiling—applied to the stomach or to the bowels
will afford great comfort. Every house where there are children ought to
have one of these india-rubber hot water bottles. It may be procured at
any respectable vulcanized india-rubber warehouse. 3. Another, and an
excellent remedy for these cases, is a hot bran poultice. The way to
make it is as follows: Stir bran into a vessel containing either a pint
or a quart (according to size of poultice required) of boiling water,
until it be of the consistence of a nice soft poultice, then put it into
a flannel bag and apply it to the part affected. When cool, dip it from
time to time in _hot_ water. 4. In case a child has a feverish cold,
especially if it be attended, as it sometimes is, with pains in the
bowels, the following is a good external application: Take a yard of
flannel, fold it three widths, then dip it in very hot water, wring it
out tolerably dry, and apply it evenly and neatly round and round the
bowels; over this, and to keep it in its place and to keep in the
moisture, put on a _dry_ flannel bandage, four yards long and four
inches wide. If it be put on at bedtime, it ought to remain on all
night. Where there are children, it is desirable to have the yard of
flannel and the flannel bandage in readiness, and then a mother will be
prepared for emergencies. Either the one or the other, then, of the
above applications will usually, in pains of the stomach and bowels,
afford great relief. There is one great advantage of the _external_
application of heat—it can never do harm; if here be inflammation, it
will do good; if there be either cramps or spasms of the stomach, it
will be serviceable; if there be colic, it will be one of the best
remedies that can be used; if it be a feverish cold, by throwing the
child into a perspiration, it will be useful.

It is well for a mother to know how to make a white-bread poultice; and
as the celebrated Abernethy was noted for his poultices, I will give you
his directions, and in his very words: “Scald out a basin, for you can
never make a good poultice unless you have perfectly boiling water,
then, having put in some hot water, throw in coarsely crumbled bread,
and cover it with a plate. When the bread has soaked up as much water as
it will imbibe, drain off the remaining water, and there will be left a
light pulp. Spread it a third of an inch thick on folded linen, and
apply it when of the temperature of a warm bath. It may be said that
this poultice will be very inconvenient if there be no lard in it, for
it will soon get dry but this is the very thing you want, and it can
easily be moistened by dropping warm water on it, while a greasy
poultice will be moist, but not wet.”




                               ACCIDENTS.


278. _Supposing a child to cut his finger, what is the best
application?_

There is nothing better than tying it up with rag in its blood, as
nothing is more healing than blood. Do not wash the blood away, but
apply the rag at once, taking care that no foreign substance be left in
the wound. If there be either glass or dirt in it, it will, of course,
be necessary to bathe the cut in warm water, to get rid of it before the
rag be applied. Some mothers use either salt, or Fryar’s Balsam, or
turpentine to a fresh wound; these plans are cruel and unnecessary, and
frequently make the cut difficult to heal. If it bleed immoderately,
sponge the wound freely with cold water. If it be a severe cut, surgical
aid, of course, will be required.

279. _If a child receive a blow, causing a bruise, what had better be
done?_

Immediately smear a small lump of _fresh_ butter on the part affected,
and renew it every few minutes for two or three hours; this is an
old-fashioned, but a very good remedy. Olive oil may—if _fresh_ butter
be not at hand—be used, or soak a piece of brown paper in one-third of
French brandy, and two-thirds of water, and immediately apply it to the
part; when dry renew it. Either of these simple plans—the butter plan is
the best—will generally prevent both swelling and disfiguration.

_A “Black Eye.”_—If a child, or indeed any one else, receive a blow over
the eye, which is likely to cause a “black eye,” there is no remedy
superior to, nor more likely to prevent one, than well buttering the
parts for two or three inches around the eye with fresh butter, renewing
it every few minutes for the space of an hour or two; if such be well
and perseveringly done, the disagreeable appearance of a “black eye”
will in all probability be prevented. A capital remedy for a “black eye”
is the arnica lotion:

                  Take of—Tincture of Arnica, one ounce;
                           Water, seven ounces:

  To make a Lotion. The eye to be bathed, by means of a soft piece of
  linen rag, with this lotion frequently; and, between times, let a
  piece of linen rag, wetted in the lotion, be applied to the eye, and
  be fastened in its place by means of a bandage.

The white lily leaf, soaked in brandy, is another excellent remedy for
the bruises of a child. Gather the white lily blossoms when in full
bloom, and put them in a wide-mouthed bottle of brandy, cork the bottle,
and it will then always be ready for use. Apply a leaf to the part
affected, and bind it on either with a bandage or with a handkerchief.
The white lily root sliced is another valuable external application for
bruises.

280. _If a child fall upon his head and be stunned, what ought to be
done?_

If he fall upon his head and be stunned, he will look deadly pale, very
much as if he had fainted. He will in a few minutes, in all probability,
regain his consciousness. Sickness frequently supervenes, which makes
the case more serious, it being a proof that injury, more or less
severe, has been done to the brain; send, therefore, instantly for a
medical man.

In the mean time, loosen both his collar and neckerchief, lay him flat
on his back, sprinkle cold water upon his face, open the windows so as
to admit plenty of fresh air, and do not let people crowd around him,
nor shout at him, as some do, to make him speak.

While he is in an unconscious state, do not on any account whatever
allow a drop of blood to be taken from him, either by leeches or by
bleeding; if you do, he will probably never rally, but will most likely
sleep “the sleep that knows no waking.”

281. _A nurse sometimes drops an infant and injures his back; what ought
to be done?_

Instantly send for a surgeon; omitting to have proper advice in such a
case has frequently made a child a cripple for life. A nurse frequently,
when she has dropped her little charge, is afraid to tell her mistress;
the consequences might then be deplorable. If ever a child scream
violently without any assignable cause, and the mother is not able for
some time to pacify him, the safer plan is that she send for a doctor,
in order that he might strip and carefully examine him; much
after-misery might often be averted if this plan were more frequently
followed.

282. _Have you any remarks to make and directions to give on accidental
poisoning by lotions, by liniments, etc.?_

It is a culpable practice of either a mother or nurse to leave
_external_ applications within the reach of a child. It is also highly
improper to put a mixture and an _external_ application (such as a
lotion or a liniment) on the same tray or on the same mantel-piece. Many
liniments contain large quantities of opium, a teaspoonful of which
would be likely to cause the death of a child. “Hartshorn and oil,” too,
has frequently been swallowed by children, and in several instances has
caused death. Many lotions contain sugar of lead, which is also
poisonous. There is not, fortunately, generally sufficient lead in the
lotion to cause death; but if there be not enough to cause death, there
may be more than enough to make the child very poorly. All these
accidents occur from disgraceful carelessness.

A mother or a nurse ought _always_, before administering a dose of
medicine to a child, to read the label on the bottle; by adopting this
simple plan many serious accidents and much after-misery might be
averted. Again, I say let every lotion, every liniment, and indeed
everything for _external_ use, be either locked up or be put out of the
way, and far away from all medicine that is given by the mouth. _This
advice admits of no exception._

If your child has swallowed a portion of a liniment containing opium,
instantly send for a medical man. In the mean time, force a strong
mustard emetic (composed of two teaspoonfuls of flour of mustard, mixed
in half a teacupful of warm water) down his throat. Encourage the
vomiting by afterward forcing him to swallow warm water. Tickle the
throat either with your finger or with a feather. Souse him alternately
in a hot and then in a cold bath. Dash cold water on his head and face.
Throw open the windows. Walk him about in the open air. Rouse him by
slapping him, by pinching him, and by shouting to him; rouse him,
indeed, by every means in your power, for if you allow him to go to
sleep, it will, in all probability, be the sleep that knows no waking!

If a child has swallowed “hartshorn and oil,” force him to drink vinegar
and water, lemon-juice and water, barley-water, and thin gruel.

If he have swallowed a lead lotion, give him a mustard emetic, and then
vinegar and water, sweetened either with honey or with sugar, to drink.

283. _Are not Lucifer Matches poisonous?_

Certainly, they are very poisonous; it is therefore desirable that they
should be put out of the reach of children. A mother ought to be very
strict with servants on this head. Moreover, lucifer matches are not
only poisonous but dangerous, as a child might set himself on fire with
them. A case bearing on the subject has just come under my own
observation. A little boy, three years old, was left alone for two or
three minutes, during which time he obtained possession of a lucifer
match, and struck a light by striking the match against the wall.
Instantly there was a blaze. Fortunately for him, in his fright, he
threw the match on the floor. His mother, at this moment, entered the
room. If his clothes had taken fire, which they might have done, had he
not thrown the match away, or if his mother had not been so near at
hand, he would, in all probability, have either been severely burned, or
have been burned to death.

284. _If a child’s clothes take fire, what ought to be done to
extinguish them?_

Lay him on the floor, then roll him either in the rug or in the carpet,
or in the door-mat, or in any thick article of dress you may either have
on, or have at hand—if it be woolen, so much the better; or throw him
down, and roll him over and over on the floor, as by excluding the
atmospheric air, the flame will go out; hence, the importance of a
mother cultivating presence of mind. If parents were better prepared for
such emergencies, such horrid disfigurations and frightful deaths would
be less frequent.

You ought to have a proper fire-guard before the nursery grate, and
should be strict in not allowing your child to play with fire. If he
still persevere in playing with it when he has been repeatedly cautioned
not to do so, he should be punished for his temerity. If anything would
justify corporal chastisement, it would surely be such an act of
disobedience. There are only two acts of disobedience that I would flog
a child for—namely, the playing with fire and the telling of a lie! If
after various warnings and wholesome corrections he still persists, it
would be well to let him slightly taste the pain of his doing so, either
by holding his hand for a moment very near the fire, or by allowing him
to slightly touch either the hot bar of the grate or the flame of the
candle. Take my word for it, the above plan will effectually cure him—he
will never do it again! It would be well for the children of the poor to
have pinafores made either of woolen or of stuff materials. The dreadful
deaths from burning, which so often occur in winter, too frequently
arise from _cotton_ pinafores first taking fire. “It has been computed
that upwards of 1000 children are annually burned to death by accident
in England.”

If all dresses, after being washed, and just before being dried, were,
for a short time, soaked in a solution of tungstate of soda, such
clothes, when dried, would be perfectly fire-proof.

Tungstate of soda may be used either with or without starch; but full
directions for the using of it will, at the time of purchase, be given
by the chemist.

285. _Is a burn more dangerous than a scald?_

A burn is generally more serious than a scald. Burns and scalds are more
dangerous on the body, especially on the chest, than either on the face
or on the extremities. The younger the child, of course, the greater is
the danger.

Scalds, both of the mouth and of the throat, from a child drinking
boiling water from the spout of a tea-kettle, are most dangerous. A poor
person’s child is, from the unavoidable absence of the mother, sometimes
shut up in the kitchen by himself, and being very thirsty, and no other
water being at hand, he is tempted in his ignorance to drink from the
tea-kettle: if the water be unfortunately boiling, it will most likely
prove to him to be a fatal draught!

286. _What are the best immediate applications to a scald or to a burn?_

There is nothing more efficacious than flour. It ought to be thickly
applied over the part affected, and should be kept in its place either
with a rag and a bandage, or with strips of old linen. If this be done,
almost instantaneous relief will be experienced, and the burn or the
scald, if superficial, will soon be well. The advantage of flour as a
remedy is this, that it is always at hand. I have seen some extensive
burns and scalds cured by the above simple plan. Another excellent
remedy is cotton-wool. The burn or the scald ought to be enveloped in
it; layer after layer should be applied until it be several inches
thick. The cotton-wool must not be removed for several days. The
cotton-wool here recommended is that purposely made for surgeons, and is
of a superior quality to that in general use. These two remedies, flour
and cotton-wool, may be used in conjunction; that is to say, the flour
may be thickly applied to the scald or to the burn, and the cotton-wool
over all.

Prepared lard—that is to say, lard without salt—is an admirable remedy
for burns and for scalds. If there be no other lard in the house but
lard _with_ salt, the salt may be readily removed by washing the lard in
cold water. Prepared lard—that is to say, lard _without_ salt—can, at
any moment, be procured from the nearest druggist in the neighborhood.
The advantages of lard are: (1) It is almost always at hand; (2) It is
very cooling, soothing, and unirritating to the part, and it gives
almost immediate freedom from pain; (3) It effectually protects and
sheathes the burn or the scald from the air; (4) It is readily and
easily applied: all that has to be done is to spread the lard either on
pieces of old linen rag, or on lint, and then to apply them smoothly to
the parts affected, keeping them in their places by means of
bandages—which bandages may be readily made from either old linen or
calico shirts. Dr. John Packard, of Philadelphia, was the first to bring
this remedy for burns and scalds before the public—he having tried it in
numerous instances, and with the happiest results. I myself have, for
many years, been in the habit of prescribing lard as a dressing for
blisters, and with the best effects. I generally advise equal parts of
prepared lard and of spermaceti cerate to be blended together to make an
ointment. The spermaceti cerate gives a little more consistence to the
lard, which, in warm weather, especially, is a great advantage.

Another valuable remedy for burns is, “carron oil;” which is made by
mixing equal parts of linseed oil and lime-water together in a bottle,
and shaking it up before using it.

Cold applications, such as cold water, cold vinegar and water, and cold
lotions, are most injurious, and, in many cases, even dangerous.

Scraped potatoes, sliced cucumber, salt, and spirits of turpentine, have
all been recommended; but, in my practice, nothing has been so
efficacious as the remedies above enumerated.

Do not wash the wound, and do not dress it more frequently than every
_other_ day. If there be much discharge, let it be gently sopped up with
soft old linen rag; but do not, _on any_ account, let the burn be rubbed
or roughly handled. I am convinced that, in the majority of cases,
wounds are too frequently dressed, and that the washing of wounds
prevents the healing of them. “It is a great mistake,” said Ambrose
Parè, “to dress ulcers too often, and to wipe their surfaces clean, for
thereby we not only remove the useless excrement, which is the mud or
sanies of ulcers, but also the matter which forms the flesh.
Consequently, for these reasons, ulcers should not be dressed too
often.”

The burn or the scald may, after the first two days, if severe, require
different dressings; but, if it be severe, the child ought of course to
be immediately placed under the care of a surgeon.

If the scald be either on the leg or on the foot, a common practice is
to take the shoe and the stocking off; in this operation, the skin is
also at the same time very apt to be removed. Now, both the shoe and the
stocking ought to be slit up, and thus to be taken off, so that neither
unnecessary pain nor mischief may be caused.

287. _If a bit of quicklime should accidentally enter the eye of my
child, what ought to be done?_

Instantly, but tenderly remove, either by means of a camel’s-hair brush
or by a small spill of paper, any bit of lime that may adhere to the
ball of the eye, or that may be within the eye or on the eyelashes; then
well bathe the eye (allowing a portion to enter it) with vinegar and
water—one part of vinegar to three parts of water, that is to say, a
quarter fill a clean half-pint medicine bottle with vinegar and then
fill it up with spring water, and it will be ready for use. Let the eye
be bathed for at least a quarter of an hour with it. The vinegar will
neutralize the lime, and will rob it of its burning properties.

Having bathed the eye with the vinegar and water for a quarter of an
hour, bathe it for another quarter of an hour simply with a little warm
water after which, drop into the eye two or three drops of the best
sweet oil, put on an eye-shade made of three thicknesses of linen rag,
covered with green silk, and then do nothing more until the doctor
arrives.

If the above rules be not _promptly_ and _properly_ followed out, the
child may irreparably lose his eyesight; hence the necessity of a
_popular_ work of this kind, to tell a mother, provided _immediate_
assistance cannot be obtained, what ought _instantly_ to be done; for
moments, in such a case, are precious.

While doing all that I have just recommended, let a surgeon be sent for,
as a smart attack of inflammation of the eye is very apt to follow the
burn of lime; but which inflammation will, provided the _previous_
directions have been _promptly_ and _efficiently_ followed out, with
appropriate treatment, soon subside.

The above accident is apt to occur to a child who is standing near a
building when the slacking of quicklime is going on, and where portions
of lime, in the form of powder, are flying about the air. It would be
well not to allow a child to stand about such places, as prevention is
always better than cure. _Quicklime_ is sometimes called _caustic lime_:
it well deserves its name, for it is a _burning lime_, and if proper
means be not promptly used, will soon burn away the sight.

288. “_What is to be done in the case of Choking?_”

Instantly put your finger into the throat and feel if the substance be
within reach; if it be food, force it down, and thus liberate the
breathing; should it be a hard substance, endeavor to hook it out; if
you cannot reach it, give a good smart blow or two with the flat of the
hand on the back; or, as recommended by a contributor to the _Lancet_,
on the chest, taking care to “seize the little patient, and place him
between your knees side ways, and in this or some other manner to
_compress the abdomen_ [the belly], otherwise the power of the blow will
be lost by the yielding of the abdominal parietes [walls of the belly],
and the respiratory effort will not be produced.” If that does not have
the desired effect, tickle the throat with your finger, so as to insure
immediate vomiting, and the consequent ejection of the offending
substance.

289. _Should my child be bitten by a dog supposed to be mad, what ought
to be done?_

Instantly well rub for the space of five or ten _seconds_—seconds, _not_
minutes—a stick of nitrate of silver (lunar caustic) into the wound. The
stick of lunar caustic should be pointed, like a cedar-pencil for
writing, in order the more thoroughly to enter the wound. This, if
properly done directly after the bite, will effectually prevent
hydrophobia. A stick of _pointed_ nitrate of silver, in a case, ready
for use, may be procured of any respectable chemist. The nitrate of
silver acts not only as a caustic to the part, but it appears
effectually to neutralize the poison, and thus by making the virus
perfectly innocuous is a complete antidote. If it be either the lip, or
the parts near the eye, or the wrist, that have been bitten, it is far
preferable to apply the caustic than to cut the part out; as the former
is neither so formidable, nor so dangerous, nor so disfiguring as the
latter, and yet it is equally as efficacious. I am indebted to the late
Mr. Youatt, the celebrated veterinary surgeon, for this valuable
antidote or remedy for the _prevention_ of the most horrible,
heart-rending, and incurable disease known. Mr. Youatt had an immense
practice among dogs as well as among horses. He was a keen observer of
disease, and a dear lover of his profession, and he had paid great
attention to rabies—dog madness. He and his assistants had been
repeatedly bitten by rabid dogs; but knowing that he was in possession
of an infallible preventive remedy, he never dreaded the wounds
inflicted either upon himself or upon his assistants. Mr. Youatt never
knew lunar caustic, if properly and _immediately_ applied, to fail. It
is, of course, only a preventive. If hydrophobia be once developed in
the human system, no antidote has ever yet, for this fell and
intractable disease, been found.

While walking the London Hospitals, upwards of thirty-five years ago, I
received an invitation from Mr. Youatt to attend a lecture on rabies—dog
madness. He had, during the lecture, a dog present laboring under
_incipient_ madness. In a day or two after the lecture, he requested me
and other students to call at his infirmary and see the dog, as the
disease was at that time fully developed. We did so, and found the poor
animal raving mad—frothing at the mouth, and snapping at the iron bars
of his prison. I was particularly struck with a peculiar brilliancy and
wildness of the dog’s eyes. He seemed as though, with affright and
consternation, he beheld objects unseen by all around. It was pitiful to
witness his frightened and anxious countenance. Death soon closed the
scene!

I have thought it my duty to bring the value of lunar caustic as a
preventive of hydrophobia prominently before your notice, and to pay a
tribute of respect to the memory of Mr. Youatt—a man of talent and
genius.

Never kill a dog supposed to be mad who has bitten either a child, or
any one else, until it has, past all doubt, been ascertained whether he
be really mad or not. He ought, of course, to be tied up, and be
carefully watched, and be prevented the while from biting any one else.
The dog, by all means, should be allowed to live at least for some
weeks, as the fact of his remaining will be the best guarantee that
there is no fear of the bitten child having caught hydrophobia.

There is a foolish prejudice abroad, that a dog, be he mad or not, who
has bitten a person ought to be _immediately_ destroyed; that although
the dog be not at the time mad, but should at a future period become so,
the person who had been bitten when the dog was _not_ mad, would, when
the dog became mad, have hydrophobia! It seems almost absurd to bring
the subject forward; but the opinion is so very general and deep rooted,
that I think it well to declare that there is not the slightest
foundation of truth in it, but that it is a ridiculous fallacy!

A cat sometimes goes mad, and its bite may cause hydrophobia, indeed,
the bite of a mad cat is more dangerous than the bite of a mad dog. A
bite from a mad cat ought to be treated precisely in the same
manner—namely, with the lunar caustic—as for a mad dog.

A bite either from a dog or from a cat _who is not mad_, from a cat
especially, is often venomous and difficult to heal. The best
application is _immediately_ to apply a large hot white-bread poultice
to the part, and to renew it every four hours; and, if there be much
pain in the wound, to well foment the part, every time before applying
the poultice, with a hot chamomile and poppy-head fomentation.

Scratches of a cat are best treated by smearing, and that freely and
continuously for an hour, and then afterward at longer intervals, fresh
butter on the part affected. If fresh butter be not at hand, fresh
lard—that is to say, lard _without_ salt—will answer the purpose. If the
pain of the scratch be very intense, foment the part affected with hot
water, and then apply a hot white-bread poultice, which should be
frequently renewed.

290. _What is the best application in case of a sting either from a bee
or from a wasp?_

Extract the sting, if it have been left behind, either by means of a
pair of dressing forceps, or by the pressure of the hollow of a small
key—a watch-key will answer the purpose; then, a little blue (which is
used in washing) moistened with water, should be immediately applied to
the part; or, apply a few drops of solution of potash, which may be
instantly procured of a druggist, as he always keeps it ready prepared,
or “apply moist snuff or tobacco, rubbing it well in,” and renew from
time to time either of them if either of these be not at hand, either
honey, or treacle, or fresh butter, will answer the purpose. Should
there be much swelling or inflammation, apply a hot white-bread
poultice, and renew it frequently. In eating apricots, or peaches, or
other fruit, they ought to, beforehand, be carefully examined, in order
to ascertain that no wasp is lurking in them; otherwise, it may sting
the throat, and serious consequences will ensue.

291. _If a child receive a fall, causing the skin to be grazed, can you
tell me of a good application?_

You will find gummed paper an excellent remedy; the way of preparing it
is as follows: Apply evenly, by means of a small brush, thick mucilage
of gum arabic to cap paper; hang it up to dry, and keep it ready for
use. When wanted, cut a portion as large as may be requisite, then
moisten it with your tongue, in the same manner you would a postage
stamp, and apply it to the grazed part. It may be removed when necessary
by simply wetting it with water. The part in two or three days will be
well. There is usually a margin of gummed paper sold with postage
stamps; this will answer the purpose equally well. If the gummed paper
be not at hand, then frequently, for the space of an hour or two, smear
the part affected with fresh butter.

292. _In case of a child swallowing by mistake either laudanum, or
paregoric, or Godfrey’s Cordial, or any other preparation of opium, what
ought to be done?_

Give, _as quickly as possible_, a strong mustard emetic; that is to say,
mix two teaspoonfuls of flour of mustard in half a teacupful of water,
and force it down his throat. If free vomiting be not induced, tickle
the upper part of the swallow with a feather; drench the little
patient’s stomach with large quantities of warm water. As soon as it can
be obtained from a druggist, give him the following emetic draught:

                 Take of—Sulphate of Zinc, one scruple;
                          Simple Syrup, one drachm;
                          Distilled Water, seven drachms:

  To make a Draught.

Smack his buttocks and his back; walk him, or lead him, or carry him
about in the fresh air; shake him by the shoulders; pull his hair;
tickle his nostrils; shout and holla in his ears; plunge him into a warm
bath and then into a cold bath alternately; well sponge his head and
face with cold water; dash cold water on his head, face, and neck; and
do not, on any account, until the effects of the opiate are gone off,
allow him to go to sleep; if you do, he will never wake again! While
doing all these things, of course, you ought to lose no time in sending
for a medical man.

293. _Have you any observations to make on parents allowing the Deadly
Nightshade—the Atropa Belladonna—to grow in their gardens?_

I wish to caution you _not_ on any account to allow the Belladonna—the
Deadly Nightshade—to grow in your garden. The whole plant—root, leaves,
and berries—is poisonous; and the berries, being attractive to the eye,
are very alluring to children.

294. _What is the treatment of poisoning by Belladonna?_

Instantly send for a medical man; but, in the mean time, give an
emetic—a mustard emetic;—mix two teaspoonfuls of flour of mustard in
half a teacupful of warm water, and force it down the child’s throat;
then drench him with warm water, and tickle the upper part of his
swallow either with a feather or with the finger, to make him sick; as
the grand remedy is an emetic to bring up the offending cause. If the
emetic have not acted sufficiently, the medical man when he arrives may
deem it necessary to use the stomach-pump; but remember not a moment
must be lost, for moments are precious in a case of belladonna
poisoning, in giving a mustard emetic, and repeating it again and again
until the enemy be dislodged. Dash cold water upon his head and face;
the best way of doing which is by means of a large sponge, holding his
head and his face over a wash-hand basin, half filled with cold water,
and filling the sponge from the basin, and squeezing it over his head
and face, allowing the water to continuously stream over them for an
hour or two, or until the effects of the poison have passed away. This
sponging of the head and face is very useful in poisoning by opium, as
well as in poisoning by belladonna; indeed, the treatment of poisoning
by the one is very similar to the treatment of poisoning by the other.
I, therefore, for the further treatment of poisoning by belladonna, beg
to refer you to a previous Conversation on the treatment of poisoning by
opium.

295. _Should a child put either a pea or a bead, or any other foreign
substance, up the nose, what ought to be done?_

Do not attempt to extract it yourself, or you might push it farther in,
but send instantly for a surgeon, who will readily remove it, either
with a pair of forceps, or by means of a bent probe, or with a director.
If it be a pea, and it be allowed for any length of time to remain in,
it will swell, and will thus become difficult to extract, and may
produce great irritation and inflammation. A child ought not to be
allowed to play with peas or with beads (unless the beads are on a
string), as he is apt, for amusement, to push them up his nose.

296. _If a child have put either a pea, a bean, a bead, a cherry-stone,
or any other smooth substance, into his ear, what ought to be done to
remove it?_

Turn his head on one side, in order to let the ear with the pea or bead
in it be undermost, then give with the flat of your hand two or three
sharp, sudden slaps or boxes on the other, or _upper_most ear, and most
likely the offending substance will drop out. Poking at the ear will, in
the majority of cases, only send the substance farther in, and will make
it more difficult (if the above simple plan does not succeed) for the
medical man to remove. The surgeon will, in all probability, syringe the
ear; therefore, have a supply of warm water in readiness for him, in
order that no time may be lost.

297. _If an earwig, or any other living thing, should get into the ear
of a child, what ought to be done?_

Lay the child on his side, the affected ear being uppermost, and fill
the ear, from a teaspoon, with either water or sweet oil. The water or
oil will carry the living thing, whatever it be, out of the ear, and the
child is at once relieved.

298. _If a child swallow a piece of broken glass, what ought to be
done?_

Avoid purgatives, as the free action on the bowels would be likely to
force the spiculæ of glass into the mucous membrane of the bowels, and
thus would wound them, and might cause ulceration, and even death. “The
object of treatment will be to allow them to pass through the intestines
well enveloped by the other contents of the tube; and for this purpose a
solid farinaceous diet should be ordered, and purgatives scrupulously
avoided.”

299. _If a child swallow a pin, what should be done?_

Treat him as for broken glass. Give him no aperients, or it might, in
action, force the pin into the bowel. I have known more than one
instance where a child, after swallowing a pin, to have voided it in his
motion.

300. _If a child swallow a coin of any kind, is danger likely to ensue,
and what ought to be done?_

There is, as a rule, no danger. A dose or two of castor oil will be all
that is usually necessary. The evacuations ought to be carefully
examined until the coin be discovered. I once knew a child swallow a
penny-piece, and pass it in his motions.

301. _If a child, while playing with a small coin (such as either a
threepenny or a fourpenny piece), or any other substance, should toss it
into his mouth, and inadvertently allow it to enter the windpipe, what
ought to be done?_

Take hold of him by the legs, allowing his head to hang downward; then
give him, with the palm of your hand, several sharp blows on his back,
and you may have the good fortune to see the coin coughed out of his
mouth. Of course, if this plan does not succeed, send instantly for a
medical man.




                         BOYHOOD AND GIRLHOOD.


                  _’Tis with him e’en standing water,
                  Between boy and man._
                                      SHAKSPEARE.

                    _Standing with reluctant feet
                    Where the brook and river meet,
                    Womanhood and childhood fleet!_
                                        LONGFELLOW.




                             ABLUTION, ETC.


302. _Have you any remarks to make on the Ablution of boys and girls?_

How is it that a mother thinks it absolutely necessary (which it really
is) that her babe’s _whole_ body should every morning be washed; and yet
who does not deem it needful that her girl or boy of twelve years old,
should go through the process of daily and _thorough_ ablution? If the
one case be necessary, sure I am that the other is equally if not more
needful.

Thorough ablution of the body every morning at least is essential to
health. I maintain that no one can be in the enjoyment of perfect health
who does not keep his skin—the whole of his skin—clean. In the absence
of cleanliness, a pellicle forms on the skin which engenders disease.
Moreover, a person who does not keep his skin clean is more susceptible
of contracting contagious disease, such as small-pox, typhus fever,
cholera, diphtheria, scarlet fever, etc.

[Illustration: BOYHOOD AND GIRLHOOD.—AFTER THE SHOWER.]

Thorough ablution of the body is a grand requisite of health. I maintain
that no one can be perfectly healthy unless he thoroughly wash his
body—the whole of his body; if filth accumulate, which, if not washed
off, it is sure to do, disease must, as a matter of course, follow.
Besides, ablution is a delightful process; it makes one feel fresh and
sweet, and young and healthy; it makes the young look handsome and the
old look young! Thorough ablution might truly be said both to renovate
and to rejuvenize! A scrupulously clean skin is one of the grand
distinctive characteristics both of a lady and of a gentleman.

Dirty people are not only a nuisance to themselves, but to all around;
they are not only a nuisance, but a danger, as their dirty bodies are
apt to carry from place to place contagious diseases.

It is important that parts that are covered should be kept cleaner than
parts exposed to the air, as dirt is more apt to fester in dark places;
besides, parts exposed to the air have the advantage of the air’s
sweetening properties; air acts as a bath, and purifies the skin
amazingly.

It is desirable to commence a complete system of washing early in life,
as then it becomes a second nature, and cannot afterward be dispensed
with. One accustomed to the luxury of his morning ablution would feel
most uncomfortable if anything prevented him from taking it; he would as
soon think of dispensing with his breakfast as with his bath.

Every boy, every girl, and every adult ought each to have either a room
or a dressing-room to himself or to herself, in order that he or she
might strip to the skin and thoroughly wash themselves; no one can wash
properly and effectually without doing so.

Now, for the paraphernalia required for the process: (1) A large
nursery-basin, one that will hold six or eight quarts of water
(Wedgwood’s make being considered the best); (2) A piece of coarse
flannel, a yard long and half a yard wide; (3) A large sponge; (4) A
tablet either of the best yellow or of curd soap; (5) Two towels, one
being a diaper and the other a Turkish rubber.

Now, as to the manner of performing ablution. You ought to fill the
basin three parts full with _rain_ water; then, having well soaped and
cleansed your hands, re-soap them, dip your head and face into the
water, then with the soaped hands well rub and wash your head, face,
neck, chest, and armpits; having done which, take the wetted sponge, and
go over all the parts previously traveled over by the soaped hands; then
fold the flannel as you would a neckerchief, and dip it in the water,
then throw it, as you would a skipping-rope, over your shoulders, and
move it a few times from right to left and from left to right, and up
and down, and then across the back and loins; having done which, dip the
sponge in the water, and holding your head under the water, let the
water stream from the sponge a time or two over your head, neck, and
face. Dip your head and face in the water, then put your hands and arms
(as far as they will go) into the water, holding them there while you
can count thirty. Having reduced the quantity of water to a third of a
basinful, place the basin on the floor, and sit (while you can count
fifty) _in_ the water; then put one foot at a time in the water, and
quickly rub, with soaped hands, up and down your leg, over the foot, and
pass your thumb between each toe (this latter procedure tends to keep
away soft corns); then take the sponge, filled with water, and squeeze
it over your leg and foot, from the knee downward,—then serve your other
leg and foot in the same way. By adopting the above plan, the whole of
the body will, every morning, be thoroughly washed.

A little warm water might at first, and during the winter time, be
added, to take off the chill; but the sooner quite cold water is used
the better. The body ought to be quickly dried (taking care to wipe
between each toe), first with the diaper, and then with the Turkish
rubber. In drying your back and loins, you ought to throw, as you would
a skipping-rope, the Turkish rubber over your shoulders, and move it a
few times from side to side, until the parts be dry.

Although the above description is necessarily prolix, the washing itself
ought to be very expeditiously performed; there should be no dawdling
over it, otherwise the body will become chilled, and harm instead of
good will be the result. If due dispatch be used, the whole of the body
might, according to the above method, be thoroughly washed and dried in
the space of ten minutes.

A boy ought to wash his head, as above directed, every morning, a girl,
who has much hair, once a week, with soap and water, with flannel and
sponge. The hair, if not frequently washed, is very dirty, and nothing
is more repulsive than a dirty head!

It might be said, “Why do you go into particulars? why dwell so much
upon minutiæ? Every one, without being told, knows how to wash himself!”
I reply, “That very few people do know how to wash themselves properly;
it is a misfortune they do not—they would be both much healthier and
happier if they did!”

303. _Have you any remarks to make on boys and girls learning to swim?_

Let me strongly urge you to let your sons and daughters be _early_
taught to swim. Swimming is a glorious exercise—one of the best that can
be taken; it expands the chest; it promotes digestion; it develops the
muscles, and brings into action some muscles that in any other form of
exercise are but seldom brought into play; it strengthens and braces the
whole frame, and thus makes the swimmer resist the liability of catching
colds; it gives both boys and girls courage, energy, and
self-reliance,—splendid qualities in this rough world of ours. Swimming
is oftentimes the means of saving human life; this of itself would be a
great recommendation of its value. It is a delightful amusement; to
breast the waves is as exhilarating to the spirits as clearing on
horseback a five-barred gate.

The art of learning to swim is quite as necessary to be learned by a
girl as by a boy; the former has similar muscles, lungs, and other
organs to develop as the latter. It is very desirable that in large
towns swimming-baths for ladies should be instituted.

Swimming ought, then, to be a part and parcel of the education of every
boy and of every girl.

Swimming does not always agree. This sometimes arises from a person
being quite cold before he plunges into the water. Many people have an
idea that they ought to go into the water while their bodies are in a
cool state. Now this is a mistaken notion, and is likely to produce
dangerous consequences. The skin ought to be comfortably warm, neither
very hot nor very cold, and then the bather will receive every advantage
that cold bathing can produce. If he go into the bath while the body is
cold, the blood becomes chilled, and is driven to internal parts, and
thus mischief is frequently produced.

A boy, after using cold bathing, ought, if it _agree_ with him, to
experience a pleasing glow over the whole surface of his body, his
spirits and appetite should be increased, and he ought to feel stronger;
but if it _disagree_ with him, a chilliness and coldness, a lassitude
and a depression of spirits, will be the result; the face will be pale
and the features will be pinched, and, in some instances, the lips and
the nails will become blue; all these are signs that _cold_ bathing is
injurious, and, therefore, that it ought on no account to be persevered
in, unless these symptoms have hitherto proceeded from his going into
the bath while he was quite cold. He may, previously to entering the
bath, warm himself by walking briskly for a few minutes. Where _cold_
sea-water bathing does not agree, _warm_ sea bathing should be
substituted.

304. _Which do you prefer—sea bathing or fresh-water bathing?_

Sea bathing. Sea bathing is incomparably superior to fresh-water
bathing; the salt water is far more refreshing and invigorating; the
battling with the waves is more exciting; the sea breezes, blowing on
the nude body, breathes (for the skin is a breathing apparatus) health
and strength into the frame, and comeliness into the face; the sea water
and the sea breezes are splendid cosmetics; the salt water is one of the
finest applications, both for strengthening the roots and brightening
the color of the hair, provided grease and pomatum have not been
previously used.

305. _Have you any directions to give as to the time and the seasons,
and the best mode of sea bathing?_

Summer and autumn are the best seasons of the year for cold sea
bathing—August and September being the best months. To prepare the skin
for the cold sea bathing, it would be well, before taking a dip in the
sea, to have on the previous day a warm salt-water bath. It is
injurious, and even dangerous, to bathe _immediately_ after a _full_
meal; the best time to bathe is about two hours after breakfast—that is
to say, at about eleven or twelve o’clock in the forenoon. The bather,
as soon as he enters the water, _ought instantly_ to wet his head; this
may be done either by his jumping at once from the machine into the
water, or, if he have not the courage to do so, by plunging his head
without loss of time _completely_ under the water. He should remain in
the water about a quarter of an hour, but never longer than half an
hour.

Many bathers by remaining a long time in the water do themselves great
injury. If sea bathing be found to be invigorating—and how often to the
delicate it has proved to be truly magical—a patient may bathe once
every day, but on no account oftener. If he be not strong, he had
better, at first, bathe only every other day, or even only twice a week.

The bather, after leaving the machine, ought, for half an hour, to take
a brisk walk in order to promote a reaction, and thus to cause a free
circulation of the blood.

306. _Do you think a tepid bath may be more safely used?_

A tepid bath may be taken at almost any time; and a bather may remain
longer in one, with safety, than in a cold bath. A tepid bath from 62 to
96 degrees of Fahrenheit.

307. _Do you approve of warm bathing?_

A warm bath may, with advantage, be occasionally used—say once a week. A
warm bath from 97 to 100 degrees of Fahrenheit. A warm bath cleanses the
skin more effectually than either a cold or a tepid bath; but, as it is
more relaxing, ought not to be employed so often as either of them. A
person should not continue longer than ten minutes in a warm bath. Once
a week, as a rule, is quite often enough for a warm bath; and it would
be an excellent plan if every boy and girl and adult would make a
practice of having one _regularly_ every week, unless any special reason
should arise to forbid its use.

308. _But does not warm bathing, by relaxing the pores of the skin,
cause a person to catch cold if he expose himself to the air immediately
afterward?_

There is, on this point, a great deal of misconception and unnecessary
fear. A person, _immediately_ after using a warm bath, should take
proper precautions—that is to say, he must not expose himself to
draughts, neither ought he to wash himself in _cold_ water, nor should
he, _immediately_ after taking one, drink _cold_ water. But he may
follow his usual exercise or employment, provided the weather be fine,
and the wind be neither in the east nor the northeast.

Every house of any pretension ought to have a bath-room. Nothing would
be more conducive to health than regular systematic bathing. A hot and
cold bath, a sitz bath and a shower bath—each and all in their turn—are
grand requisites to preserve and procure health. If the house cannot
boast of a bath-room, then the Corporation baths (which nearly every
large town possesses) ought to be liberally patronized.

309. _What is the best application for the hair?_

A sponge and _cold_ water, and two good hair-brushes. Avoid grease,
pomatum, bandaline, and all abominations of that kind. There is a
natural oil of the hair, which is far superior to either Rowland’s
Macassar oil or any other oil! The best scent for the hair is an
occasional dressing of soap and water; the best beautifier of the hair
is a downright thorough good brushing with two good hair-brushes! Again,
I say, _avoid grease of all kinds to the hair_. “And as for women’s
hair, don’t plaster it with scented and sour grease, or with any grease;
it has an oil of its own. And don’t tie up your hair tight, and make it
like a cap of iron over your scull. And why are your ears covered? You
hear all the worse, and they are not the clearer. Besides, the ear is
beautiful in itself, and plays its own part in the concert of the
features.”

If the hair cannot, without some application, be kept tidy, then a
little of the best sweet oil might, by means of an old tooth-brush, be
used to smoothe it; sweet oil is, for the purpose, one of the most
simple and harmless of dressings; but, as I said before, the hair’s own
natural oil cannot be equaled, far less surpassed!

If the hair fall off, castor oil, scented with a few drops of essence of
bergamot and oil of lavender, is a good remedy to prevent its doing so;
a little of it ought, night and morning, to be well rubbed into the
roots of the hair. Cocoanut oil is another excellent application for the
falling off of the hair.




                               CLOTHING.


310. _Do you approve of a boy wearing flannel next the skin?_

England is so variable a climate, and the changes from heat to cold, and
from dryness to moisture of the atmosphere, are so sudden, that some
means are required to guard against their effects. Flannel, as it is a
bad conductor of heat, prevents the sudden changes from effecting the
body, and thus is a great preservative against cold.

Flannel is as necessary in the summer as in the winter time; indeed, we
are more likely both to sit and to stand in draughts in the summer than
in the winter; and thus we are more liable to become chilled and to
catch cold.

Woolen shirts are now much worn; they are very comfortable and
beneficial to health. Moreover, they simplify the dress, as they
supersede the necessity of wearing either both flannel and linen, or
flannel and calico shirts.

311. _Flannel sometimes produces great irritation of the skin; what
ought to be done to prevent it?_

Have a moderately fine flannel, and persevere in its use; the skin in a
few days will bear it comfortably. The Angola and wove-silk waistcoats
have been recommended as substitutes, but there is nothing equal to the
old-fashioned Welsh flannel.

312. _If a boy have delicate lungs, do you approve of his wearing a
prepared hare-skin over the chest?_

I do not. The chest may be kept too warm as well as too cold. The
hare-skin heats the chest too much, and thereby promotes a violent
perspiration; which, by his going into the cold air, may become suddenly
checked, and may thus produce mischief. If the chest be delicate, there
is nothing like flannel to ward off colds.

313. _After an attack of Rheumatic Fever, what extra clothing do you
advise?_

In the case of a boy, or a girl, just recovering from a severe attack of
rheumatic fever, flannel next the skin ought always to be worn—flannel
drawers as well as a flannel vest.

314. _Have you any remarks to make on boys’ waistcoats?_

Fashion in this, as in most other instances, is at direct variance with
common sense. It would seem that fashion was intended to make work for
the doctor, and to swell the bills of mortality! It might be asked, what
part of the chest, in particular, ought to be kept warm? The upper part
needs it most. It is in the _upper_ part of the lungs that tubercles
(consumption) usually first make their appearance; and is it not
preposterous to have such parts, in particular, kept cool?
Double-breasted waistcoats cannot be too strongly recommended for
_delicate_ youths and for all men who have _weak_ chests.

315. _Have you any directions to give respecting the shoes and the
stockings?_

The shoes for winter should be moderately thick and water-proof. If boys
and girls be delicate, they ought to have double soles to their shoes,
with a piece of bladder between each sole, or the inner sole may be made
of cork; either of the above plans will make the soles of boots and
shoes completely water-proof. In wet or dirty weather, india-rubber
overshoes are useful, as they keep the _upper_ as well as the _under_
leathers perfectly dry.

The socks or stockings, for winter, ought to be either lamb’s-wool or
worsted; it is absurd to wear _cotton_ socks or stockings all the year
round. I should advise a boy to wear socks, not stockings; as he will
then be able to dispense with garters. Garters, as I have remarked in a
previous Conversation, are injurious—they not only interfere with the
circulation of the blood, but also, by pressure, injure the bones, and
thus the shape of the legs.

Boys and girls cannot be too particular in keeping their feet warm and
dry, as cold wet feet are one of the most frequent exciting causes of
bronchitis, of sore throats, and of consumption.

316. _When should a girl begin to wear stays?_

She ought never to wear them.

317. _Do not stays strengthen the body?_

No; on the contrary, they weaken it. (1) _They weaken the muscles._ The
pressure upon them causes them to waste; so that, in the end, a girl
cannot do without them, as the stays are then obliged to perform the
duty of the wasted muscles. (2) _They weaken the lungs_ by interfering
with their functions. Every inspiration is accompanied by a movement of
the ribs. If this movement be impeded, the functions of the lungs are
impeded likewise; and, consequently, disease is likely to follow; and
either difficulty of breathing, or cough, or consumption, may ensue. (3)
_They weaken the heart’s action_, and thus frequently produce
palpitation, and, perhaps, eventually organic or incurable disease of
the heart. (4) _They weaken the digestion_, by pushing down the stomach
and the liver, and by compressing the latter; and thus induce
indigestion, flatulence, and liver disease. (5) _They weaken the
bowels_, by impeding their proper peristaltic (spiral) motion, and thus
might produce either constipation or a rupture. Several years ago, while
prosecuting my anatomical studies in London University College
Dissecting-rooms, on opening a young woman, I discovered an immense
indentation of the liver large enough to admit a rolling-pin, entirely
produced by tight lacing!

Is it not presumptuous to imagine that man can improve upon God’s works;
and that if more support had been required the Almighty would not have
given it!

               “God never made his work for man to mend.”

318. _Have you any remarks to make on female dress?_

There is a perfect disregard of health in every thing appertaining to
fashion. Parts that ought to be kept warm, remain unclothed: the _upper_
portion of the chest, most prone to tubercles (consumption), is
completely exposed; the feet, great inlets to cold, are covered with
thin stockings, and with shoes as thin as paper. Parts that should have
full play are cramped and hampered; the chest is cribbed in with stays,
the feet with _tight_ shoes,—hence causing deformity, and preventing a
free circulation of blood. The mind, that ought to be calm and
unruffled, is kept in a constant state of excitement by balls, and
concerts, and plays. Mind and body sympathize with each other, and
disease is the consequence. Night is turned into day; and a delicate
girl leaves the heated ball-room, decked out in her airy finery, to
breathe the damp and cold air of night. She goes to bed, but, for the
first few hours, she is too much excited to sleep; toward morning, when
the air is pure and invigorating, and, when to breathe it, would be to
inhale health and life, she falls into a feverish slumber, and wakes not
until noonday. Oh, that a mother should be so blinded and so infatuated!

319. _Have you any observations to make on a girl wearing a green
dress?_

It is injurious to wear a _green_ dress, if the color have been imparted
to it by means of _Scheele’s green_, which is arsenite of copper—a
deadly poison. I have known the arsenic to fly off from a _green_ dress
in the form of powder, and to produce, in consequence, ill health.
Gas-light green is a lovely green, and free from all danger, and is
fortunately superseding the Scheele’s green both in dresses and in
worsted work. I should advise my fair reader, when she selects green as
her color, always to choose the gas-light green, and to wear and to use
for worsted work no other green besides.




                                 DIET.


320. _Which is the most wholesome, coffee or tea, where milk does not
agree, for a youth’s breakfast?_

Coffee, provided it be made properly, and provided the boy or the girl
take a great deal of out-door exercise; if a youth be much confined
within doors, black tea is preferable to coffee. The usual practice of
making coffee is to boil it, to get out the strength! But the fact is,
the process of boiling boils the strength away; it drives off that
aromatic, grateful principle, so wholesome to the stomach, and so
exhilarating to the spirits; and, in lieu of which, extracts its dregs
and impurities, which are both heavy and difficult of digestion. The
coffee ought, if practicable, to be _freshly_ ground every morning, in
order that you may be quite sure that it be perfectly genuine, and that
none of the aroma of the coffee has flown off from long exposure to the
atmosphere. If a youth’s bowels be inclined to be costive, coffee is
preferable to tea for breakfast, as coffee tends to keep the bowels
regular. Fresh milk ought always to be added to the coffee in the
proportion of half coffee and half new milk. If coffee does not agree,
then _black_ tea should be substituted, which ought to be taken with
plenty of fresh milk in it. Milk may be frequently given in tea, when it
otherwise would disagree.

When a youth be delicate, it is an excellent plan to give him every
morning before he leaves his bed, a tumblerful of _new_ milk. The
draught of milk, of course, is not in any way to interfere with his
regular breakfast.

321. _Do you approve of a boy eating meat with his breakfast?_

This will depend upon the exercise he uses. If he have had a good walk
or run before breakfast, or if he intend, after breakfast, to take
plenty of athletic out-door exercise, meat, or a rasher or two of bacon,
may, with advantage be eaten, but not otherwise.

322. _What is the best dinner for a youth?_

Fresh mutton or beef, a variety of vegetables, and a farinaceous
pudding. It is a bad practice to allow him to dine exclusively, either
on a fruit-pudding or on any other pudding, or on pastry. Unless he be
ill, he must, if he is to be healthy, strong, and courageous, eat meat
every day of his life. “All courageous animals are carnivorous, and
greater courage is to be expected in a people, such as the English,
whose food is strong and hearty, than in the half-starved commonalty of
other countries.”

Let him be debarred from rich soups and from high-seasoned dishes, which
only disorder the stomach and inflame the blood. It is a mistake to give
a boy or girl broth or soup, in lieu of meat for dinner; the stomach
takes such slops in a grumbling way, and is not at all satisfied. It may
be well, occasionally, to give a youth with his dinner, _in addition to
his meat_, either good soup or good broth, not highly seasoned, made of
good _meat_ stock. But after all that can be said on the subject, a
plain joint of meat, either roast or boiled, is far superior for health
and strength than either soup or broth, let it be ever so good or so
well made.

He should be desired to take plenty of time over his dinner, so that he
may be able to chew his food well, and thus that it may be reduced to an
impalpable mass, and be well mixed with the saliva,—which the action of
the jaws will cause to be secreted—before it passes into the stomach. If
such were usually the case, the stomach would not have double duty to
perform, and a boy would not so frequently lay the foundation of
indigestion, etc., which may embitter and even make miserable his
after-life.

Meat, plain pudding, vegetables, bread, and hunger for sauce (which
exercise will readily give), is the best, and indeed, should be as a
rule, the only dinner he should have. A youth ought not to dine later
than two o’clock.

323. _Do you consider broths and soups wholesome?_

The stomach can digest solid much more readily than it can liquid food;
on which account the dinner specified above is far preferable to one
either broth or of soup.

Fluids in large quantities too much dilute the gastric juice and
over-distend the stomach, and hence weaken it, and thus produce
indigestion.

324. _Do you approve of a boy drinking beer with his dinner?_

There is no objection to a little good, mild table-beer, but _strong_
ale ought never to be allowed. It is, indeed, questionable, whether a
boy, unless he takes unusual exercise, requires anything but water with
his meals.

325. _Do you approve of a youth, more especially if he be weakly, having
a glass or two of wine after dinner?_

I disapprove of it. His young blood does not require to be inflamed and
his sensitive nerves excited with wine; and if he be delicate, I should
be sorry to endeavor to strengthen him by giving him such an inflammable
fluid. If he be weakly, he is more predisposed to put on either fever or
inflammation of some organ; and, being thus predisposed, wine would be
likely to excite either the one or the other of them into action. A
parent ought on no account to allow a boy to touch spirits, however much
diluted; they are to the young still more deadly in their effects than
wine.

326. _Have you any objections to a youth drinking tea?_

Not at all, provided it be not _green_ tea, that it be not made strong,
and that it have plenty of milk in it. Green tea is apt to make people
nervous, and boys and girls ought not even to know what it is to be
nervous.

327. _Do you object to supper for a youth?_

Meat suppers are highly prejudicial. If he be hungry (and if he have
been much in the open air, he is almost sure to be), a piece of bread
and cheese, or of bread and butter, with a draught either of new milk or
of table-beer, will form the best supper he can have. He ought not to
sup later than eight o’clock.

328. _Do you approve of a boy having anything between meals?_

I do not; let him have four meals a day, and he will require nothing in
the intervals. It is a mistaken notion that “little and often is best.”
The stomach requires rest as much as, or perhaps more than (for it is
frequently sadly overworked) any other part of the body. I do not mean
that he is to have “_much_ and seldom”: moderation, in everything, is to
be observed. Give him as much as a growing boy requires (_and that is a
great deal_), but do not let him eat gluttonously, as many indulgent
parents encourage their children to do. Intemperance in eating cannot be
too strongly condemned.

329. _Have you any objections to a boy having pocket money?_

It is a bad practice to allow a boy _much_ pocket money; if he be so
allowed, he will be loading his stomach with sweets, fruit, and pastry,
and thus his stomach will become cloyed and disordered, and the keen
appetite, so characteristic of youth, will be blunted, and ill health
will ensue. “In a public education, boys early learn temperance, and if
the parents and friends would give them less money upon their usual
visits, it would be much to their advantage, since it may justly be said
that a great part of their disorders arise from surfeit, ‘_plus occidit
gula quam gladius_’ (gluttony kills more than the sword).”

How true is the saying that “many people dig their graves with their
teeth.” You may depend upon it that more die from stuffing than from
starvation!




                           AIR AND EXERCISE.


330. _Have you any remarks to make on fresh air and exercise for boys
and girls?_

Girls and boys, especially the former, are too much confined within
doors. It is imperatively necessary, if you wish them to be strong and
healthy, that they should have plenty of fresh air and exercise;
remember, I mean fresh air—country air, not the close air of a town. By
exercise, I mean the free unrestrained use of the limbs. Girls, in this
respect, are unfortunately worse off than boys, although they have
similar muscles to develop, similar lungs that require fresh air, and
similar nerves to be braced and strengthened. It is not considered
ladylike to be natural—all their movements must be measured by rule and
compass!

The reason why so many young girls of the present day are so sallow,
undersized, and ill-shaped, is for the want of air and exercise. After a
time the want of air and exercise, by causing ill health, makes them
slothful and indolent—it is a trouble for them to move from their
chairs!

Respiration, digestion, and a proper action of the bowels imperatively
demand fresh air and exercise. Ill health will inevitably ensue if boys
and girls are cooped up a great part of the day in a close room. A
distinguished writer of the present day says: “The children of the very
poor are always out and about. In this respect they are an example to
those careful mammas who keep their children, the whole day long, in
their chairs, reading, writing, ciphering, drawing, practicing music
lessons, doing crochet work, or anything, in fact, except running about,
in spite of the sunshine always peeping in and inviting them out of
doors; and who, in the due course of time, are surprised to find their
children growing up with incurable heart, head, lung, or stomach
complaints.”

331. _What is the best exercise for youths?_

Walking or running, provided it be not carried to fatigue. The slightest
approach to it should warn a youth to desist from carrying it further.

Walking exercise is not sufficiently insisted upon. A boy or a girl, to
be in the enjoyment of good health, ought to walk at least ten miles
every day. I do not mean ten miles at a stretch, but at different times
of the day.

Some young ladies think it an awfully long walk if they manage a couple
of miles! How can they, with such exercise, expect to be well? How can
their muscles be developed! How can their nerves be braced? How can
their spines be strengthened and be straight? How can their blood course
merrily through their blood-vessels? How can their chests expand and be
strong? Why, it is impossible! Ill health must be the penalty of such
indolence, for Nature will not be trifled with!

Walking exercise, then, is the finest exercise that can be taken, and
must be taken, and that without stint, if boys and girls are to be
strong and well!

The advantage of our climate is, that there is not a day in the whole
year that walking exercise cannot be enjoyed. I use the term _enjoyed_
advisedly. The roads may of course be dirty; but what of that? A good,
thick pair of boots will be the remedy.

Do then, let me entreat you, insist upon your girls and boys taking
plenty of exercise; let them almost live in the open air! Do not coddle
them; this is a rough world of ours, and they must rough it; they must
be knocked about a little, and the knocks will do them good. Poor youths
who are, as it were, tied to their mothers’ apron-strings, are much to
be pitied; they are usually puny and delicate, and utterly deficient of
self-reliance.

332. _Do you approve of horse or pony exercise for boys and girls?_

Most certainly I do; but still it ought not to supersede walking. Horse
or pony exercise is very beneficial, and cannot be too strongly
recommended. One great advantage for those living in towns, which it has
over walking, is that a person may go farther into the country, and thus
be enabled to breathe a purer and more healthy atmosphere. Again, it is
a much more _amusing_ exercise than walking, and this, for the young, is
a great consideration indeed.

Horse exercise is for both boys and girls a splendid exercise; it
improves the figure, it gives grace to the movements, it strengthens the
chest, it braces the muscles, and gives to the character energy and
courage.

Both boys and girls ought to be early taught to ride. There is nothing
that gives more pleasure to the young than riding either on a pony or on
a horse, and for younger children, even on that despised, although
useful animal, a donkey. Exercise, taken with pleasure, is doubly
beneficial.

If girls were to ride more on horseback than they now do, we should hear
less of crooked spines and of round shoulders, of chlorosis and of
hysteria, and of other numerous diseases of that class, owing,
generally, to debility and to mismanagement.

Those ladies who “affect the saddle” are usually much healthier,
stronger, and straighter than those who either never or but seldom ride
on horseback.

Riding on horseback is both an exercise and an amusement, and is
peculiarly suitable for the fair sex, more especially as their modes of
exercise are somewhat limited, ladies being excluded from following many
games, such as cricket and football, both of which are practiced, with
such zest and benefit, by the rougher sex.

333. _Do you approve of carriage exercise?_

There is no muscular exertion in carriage exercise; its principal
advantage is, that it enables a person to have a change of air, which
may be purer than the one he is in the habit of breathing. But, whether
it be so or not, change of air frequently does good, even if the air be
not so pure. Carriage exercise, therefore, does only partial good, and
ought never to supersede either walking or horse exercise.

334. _What is the best time of the day for the taking of exercise?_

In the summer time, early in the morning and before breakfast, as “cool
morning air exhilarates young blood like wine.” If a boy cannot take
exercise upon an empty stomach, let him have a slice of bread and a
draught of milk. When he returns home, he will be able to do justice to
his breakfast. In fine weather he cannot take too much exercise,
provided it be not carried to fatigue.

335. _What is the best time for him to keep quiet?_

He ought not to take exercise immediately after—say for half an hour
after—a hearty meal, or it will be likely to interfere with his
digestion.




                              AMUSEMENTS.


336. _What amusements do you recommend for a boy as being most
beneficial to health?_

Many games—such as rowing, skating, cricket, quoits, football, rackets,
single-stick, bandy, bowls, skittles, and all gymnastic exercises. Such
games bring the muscles into proper action, and thus cause them to be
fully developed. They expand and strengthen the chest; they cause a due
circulation of the blood, making it to bound merrily through the
blood-vessels, and thus to diffuse health and happiness in its course.
Another excellent amusement for boys is the brandishing of clubs. They
ought to be made in the form of a constable’s staff, but should be much
larger and heavier. The manner of handling them is so graphically
described by Addison that I cannot do better than transcribe it: “When I
was some years younger than I am at present, I used to employ myself in
a more laborious diversion, which I learned from a Latin treatise of
exercises that is written with great erudition; it is there called the
σκιομαχια, or the fighting with a man’s own shadow, and consists in the
brandishing of two short sticks grasped in each hand, and loaded with
plugs of lead at either end. This opens the chest, exercises the limbs,
and gives a man all the pleasure of boxing without the blows. I could
wish that several learned men would lay out that time which they employ
in controversies and disputes about nothing, in this method of fighting
with their own shadows. It might conduce very much to evaporate the
spleen which makes them uneasy to the public as well as to themselves.”

Another capital healthful game is single-stick, which makes a boy “to
gain an upright and elastic carriage, and to learn the use of his
limbs.” Single-stick may be taught by any drill-sergeant in the
neighborhood. Do everything to make a boy strong. Remember, “the glory
of young men is their strength.”

If games were more patronized in youth, so many miserable, nervous,
useless creatures would not abound. Let a boy or a girl, then, have
plenty of play; let half of his or her time be spent in play.

There ought to be a gymnasium established in every town of the kingdom.
The gymnasium, the cricket ground, and the swimming bath are among our
finest institutions, and should be patronized accordingly.

First of all by an abundance of exercise and of fresh air make your boys
and girls, strong, and then, in due time, they will be ready and be able
to have their minds properly cultivated. Unfortunately, in this
enlightened age, we commence at the wrong end—we put the cart before the
horse—we begin by cultivating the mind, and we leave the body to be
taken care of afterward; the results are, broken health, precocious,
stunted, crooked, and deformed youths, and premature decay.

One great advantage of gymnastic exercise is, it makes the lungs expand,
it fills the lungs with air, and by doing so, strengthens the lungs
amazingly and wards off many diseases. The lungs are not sufficiently
exercised and expanded; boys and girls, girls especially, do not as a
rule half fill their lungs with air! now, air to the lungs is food to
the lungs, and portions of the lungs have not half their proper food,
and in consequence suffer.

It is very desirable that every boy and girl should, every day of his or
her life, and for a quarter of an hour at least each time, go through a
regular _breathing exercise_—that is to say, should be made to stand
upright, throw back the shoulders, and the while, alternately and
regularly, fully fill and fully empty the lungs of air. If this plan
were daily followed, the chest and lungs would be wonderfully
invigorated, and the whole body benefited.

337. _Is playing the flute, blowing the bugle, or any other wind
instrument, injurious to health?_

Decidedly so; the lungs and the windpipe are brought into unnatural
action by them. If a boy be of a consumptive habit, this will, of
course, hold good with tenfold force. If a youth must be musical, let
him be taught singing, as that, provided the lungs be not diseased, will
be beneficial.

338. _What amusements do you recommend for a girl?_

Archery, skipping, horse exercise, croquet, the hand-swing, the
fly-pole, skating, and dancing are among the best. Archery expands the
chest, throws back the shoulders, thus improving the figure, and
develops the muscles. Skipping is exceedingly good exercise for a girl,
every part of the body being put into action by it. Horse exercise is
splendid for a girl; it improves the figure amazingly—it is most
exhilarating and amusing; moreover, it gives her courage and makes her
self-reliant. Croquet develops and improves the muscles of the arms,
beautifies the complexion, strengthens the back, and throws out the
chest. Croquet is for girls and women what cricket is for boys and men—a
glorious game. Croquet has improved both the health and the happiness of
womankind more than any game ever before invented. Croquet, in the
bright sunshine, with the winds of heaven blowing about the players, is
not like a ball in a stifling hot ball-room, with gas-lights poisoning
the air. Croquet is a more sensible amusement than dancing; it brings
the intellect as well as the muscles into play. The man who invented
croquet has deserved greater glory, and has done more good to his
species, than many philosophers whose names are emblazoned in story.
Hand-swing is a capital exercise for a girl; the whole of the body is
thrown into action by it, and the spine, the shoulders, and the
shoulder-blades are especially benefited. The fly-pole, too, is good
exercise for the whole of the muscles of the body, especially of the
legs and the arms. Skating is as exhilarating as a glass of champagne,
but will do her far more good! Skating exhilarates the spirits, improves
the figure, and makes a girl balance and carry herself well; it is a
most becoming exercise for her, and is much in every way to be
commended. Moreover, skating gives a girl courage and self-reliance.
Dancing, followed as a rational amusement, causes a free circulation of
the blood, and, provided it does not induce her to sit up late at night,
is most beneficial.

339. _If dancing be so beneficial, why are balls such fruitful sources
of coughs, of colds, and consumptions?_

On many accounts. They induce young ladies to sit up late at night; they
cause them to dress more lightly than they are accustomed to do; and
thus thinly clad, they leave their homes while the weather is perhaps
piercing cold, to plunge into a suffocating, hot ball-room, made doubly
injurious by the immense number of lights, which consume the oxygen
intended for the due performance of the healthy function of the lungs.
Their partners, the brilliancy of the scene, and the music excite their
nerves to undue, and thus to unnatural action, and what is the
consequence? Fatigue, weakness, hysterics, and extreme depression
follow. They leave the heated ball-room, when the morning has far
advanced, to breathe the bitterly cold and frequently damp air of a
winter’s night, and what is the result? Hundreds die of consumption who
might otherwise have lived. Ought there not, then, to be a distinction
between a ball at midnight and a dance in the evening?

340. _But still, would you have a girl brought up to forego the
pleasures of a ball?_

If a parent prefer her so-called pleasures to her health, certainly not;
to such a mother I do not address myself.

341. _Have you any remarks to make on singing, or on reading aloud?_

Before a mother allows her daughter to take lessons in singing, she
should ascertain that there be no actual disease of the lungs, for if
there be, it will probably excite it into action; but if no disease
exist, singing or reading aloud is very conducive to health. Public
singers are seldom known to die of consumption. Singing expands the
chest, improves the pronunciation, enriches the voice for conversation,
strengthens the lungs, and wards off many of their diseases.




                               EDUCATION.


342. _Do you approve of corporal punishment in schools?_

I do not. I consider it to be decidedly injurious both to body and mind.
Is it not painful to witness the pale cheeks and the dejected looks of
those boys who are often flogged? If their tempers are mild, their
spirits are broken; if their dispositions are at all obstinate, they
become hardened and willful, and are made little better than brutes. A
boy who is often flogged loses that noble ingenuousness and fine
sensibility so characteristic of youth. He looks upon his school as his
prison, and his master as his jailer, and, as he grows up to manhood,
hates and despises the man who has flogged him. Corporal punishment is
revolting, disgusting, and demoralizing to the boy, and is degrading to
the school-master as a man and as a Christian.

  “I would have given him, Captain Fleming, had he been _my_ son,” quoth
  old Pearson the elder, “such a good sound drubbing as he never would
  have forgotten—never!”

  “Pooh! pooh! my good sir. Don’t tell me. Never saw flogging in the
  navy do good. Kept down brutes; never made a man yet.”—Dr. Norman
  Macleod in _Good Words_.

If school-masters must flog, let them flog their own sons. If they must
ruin the tempers, the dispositions, and the constitutions of boys, they
have more right to practice upon their own than on other people’s
children! Oh that parents would raise—and that without any uncertain
sound—their voices against such abominations, and the detestable cane
would soon be banished the school-room! “I am confident that no boy,”
says Addison, “who will not be allured by letters without blows, will
never be brought to anything with them. A great or good mind must
necessarily be the worst for such indignities; and it is a sad change to
lose of its virtue for the improvement of its knowledge. No one has gone
through what they call a great school, but must have remembered to have
seen children of excellent and ingenuous natures (as have afterward
appeared in their manhood). I say, no man has passed through this way of
education but must have seen an ingenuous creature expiring with shame,
with pale looks, beseeching sorrow, and silent tears, throw up its
honest eyes, and kneel on its tender knees to an inexorable blockhead,
to be forgiven the false quantity of a word in making a Latin verse. The
child is punished, and the next day he commits a like crime, and so a
third, with the same consequence. I would fain ask any reasonable man
whether this lad, in the simplicity of his native innocence, full of
shame, and capable of any impressions from that grace of soul, was not
fitted for any purpose in this life than after that spark of virtue is
extinguished in him, though he is able to write twenty verses in an
evening?”

How often is corporal punishment resorted to at school because the
master is in a passion, and he vents his rage upon the poor school-boy’s
unfortunate back!

Oh! the mistaken notion that flogging will make a bad-behaved boy a good
boy; it has the contrary effect. “‘I dunno how ’tis, sir,’ said an old
farm-laborer, in reply to a question from his clergyman respecting the
bad behavior of his children, ‘I dunno how ’tis; I beats ’em till
they’re black and blue, and when they won’t kneel down to pray I knocks
’em down, and yet they ain’t good.’”

In an excellent article in _Temple Bar_ (November, 1864) on flogging in
the army, the following sensible remarks occur: “In nearly a quarter of
a century’s experience with soldiers, the writer has always, and without
a single exception, found flogging makes a good man bad, and a bad man
worse.” With equal truth it may be said that, without a single
exception, flogging makes a good boy bad, and a bad boy worse. How many
men owe their ferocity to the canings they received when school-boys!
The early floggings hardened and soured them, and blunted their
sensibility.

Dr. Arnold of Rugby, one of the best school-masters that England ever
produced, seldom caned a boy—not more than once or twice during the half
year; but when he did cane him, he charged for the use of the cane each
time in the bill, in order that the parents might know how many times
their son had been punished. At some of our public schools nowadays a
boy is caned as many times in a morning as the worthy doctor would have
caned him during the whole half year; but then the doctor treated the
boys as gentlemen, and trusted much to their honor; but now many
school-masters trust much to fear, little to honor, and treat them as
brute beasts.

It might be said that the discipline of a school cannot be maintained
unless the boys be frequently caned—that it must be either caning or
expulsion. I deny these assertions. Dr. Arnold was able to conduct his
school with honor to himself, and with immense benefit to the rising
generation, without either frequent canings or expulsions, The humane
plan, however, requires at first both trouble and patience; and trouble
some school-masters do not like, and patience they do not possess; the
use of the cane is quick, sharp, and at the time effective.

If caning he ever necessary, which it might occasionally be, for the
telling of lies for instance, or for gross immorality, let the head
master himself be the only one to perform the operation, but let him not
be allowed to delegate it to others. A law ought in all public schools
to be in force to that effect. High time that something was done to
abate such disgraceful practices.

Never should a school-master, or any one else, be allowed, _on any
pretense whatever_, to strike a boy upon his head. Boxing of the ears
has sometimes caused laceration of the drum of the ear, and consequent
partial deafness for life. Boxing of the ears injures the brain, and
therefore the intellect.

It might be said that I am traveling out of my province in making
remarks on corporal chastisement in schools. But, with deference, I
reply that I am strictly in the path of duty. My office is to inform you
of everything that is detrimental to your children’s health and
happiness; and corporal punishment is assuredly most injurious both to
their health and happiness. It is the bounden duty of every man, and
especially of every medical man, to lift up his voice against the
abominable, disgusting, and degrading system of flogging, and to warn
parents of the danger and the mischief of sending boys to those schools
where flogging is permitted.

343. _Have you any observation to make on the selection of a female
boarding-school?_

Home education, where it be practicable, is far preferable to sending a
girl to school; as _at_ home, her health, her morals, and her household
duties can be attended to much more effectually than _from_ home.
Moreover, it is a serious injury to a girl, in more ways than one, to
separate her from her own brothers; they very much lose their affection
for each other, and mutual companionship (so delightful and beneficial
between brothers and sisters) is severed.

If home education be not practicable, great care must be taken in making
choice of a school. Boarding-school education requires great
reformation. Accomplishments, superficial acquirements, and brain-work
are the order of the day; health is very little studied. You ought, in
the education of your daughters, to remember that they, in a few years,
will be the wives and the mothers of England; and if they have not
health and strength, and a proper knowledge of household duties to
sustain their characters, what useless, listless wives and mothers they
will make!

Remember, then, the body and not the mind ought in early life to be
principally cultivated and strengthened, and that the growing brain will
not bear, with impunity, much book learning. The brain of a school-girl
is frequently injured by getting up voluminous questions by rote, that
are not of the slightest use or benefit to her or to any one else.
Instead of this ridiculous system, educate a girl to be useful and
self-reliant. “From babyhood they are given to understand that
helplessness is feminine and beautiful; helpfulness, except in certain
received forms of manifestation, unwomanly and ugly. The boys may do a
thousand things which are ‘not proper for little girls.’”

From her twelfth to her seventeenth year is the most important epoch of
a girl’s existence, as regards her future health, and consequently, in a
great measure, her future happiness; and one in which, more than at any
other period of her life, she requires a plentiful supply of fresh air,
exercise, recreation, a variety of innocent amusements, and an abundance
of good nourishment, more especially fresh meat; if therefore you have
determined on sending your girl to school, you must ascertain that the
pupils have as much plain, wholesome, nourishing food as they can eat,
that the school be situated in a healthy spot, that it be well drained,
that there be a large play-ground attached to it, that the young people
are allowed plenty of exercise in the open air—indeed, that at least
one-third of the day is spent there in croquet, archery, skipping,
battle-dore and shuttlecock, gardening, walking, running, etc.

If a girl has an _abundance_ of good nourishment, the school-mistress
must, of course, be remunerated for the necessary and costly expense;
and how can this be done on the paltry sum charged at _cheap_
boarding-schools? It is utterly impossible! The school-mistress will
live, even if the girls be half-starved. And what are we to expect from
poor and insufficient nourishment to a fast-growing girl, and at the
time of life, remember, when she requires an _extra_ quantity of good
sustaining, supporting food? A poor girl, from such treatment, becomes
either consumptive or broken down in constitution, and from which she
never recovers, but drags out a miserable existence. A _cheap_
boarding-school is _dear_ at any price.

Take care that the school-rooms are well ventilated, that they are not
overcrowded, and that the pupils are allowed chairs to sit upon, and not
those abominations—forms and stools. If you wish to try the effect of
them upon yourself, sit for a couple of hours without stirring upon a
form or upon a stool, and take my word for it you will insist that forms
and stools be banished forever from the school-room.

Assure yourself that the pupils are compelled to rise early in the
morning, and that they retire early to rest: that each young lady has a
separate bed, and that many are not allowed to sleep in the same room,
and that the apartments are large and well ventilated. A horse-hair
mattress should always be preferred to a feather bed. It is not only
better for the health, but it improves the figure. In fine, their health
and their morals ought to be preferred far above all their
accomplishments.

344. _They use, in some schools, straight-backed chairs, to make a girl
sit upright and to give strength to her back: do you approve of them?_

Certainly not. The natural and the graceful curve of the back is not the
curve of a straight-backed chair. Straight-backed chairs are instruments
of torture, and are more likely to make a girl crooked than to make her
straight. Sir Astley Cooper ridiculed straight-backed chairs, and well
he might. It is always well for a mother to try, for some considerable
time, such ridiculous inventions upon herself before she experiments
upon her unfortunate daughter. The position is most unnatural. I do not
approve of a girl lounging and lolling on a sofa; but, if she be tired
and wants to rest herself, let her, like any other reasonable being, sit
upon a comfortable ordinary chair.

If you want her to be straight, let her be made strong; and if she is to
be strong, she must use plenty of exercise and exertion, such as
drilling, dancing, skipping, archery, croquet, hand-swinging, horse
exercise, swimming, bowls, etc. This is the plan to make her back
straight and her muscles strong. Why should we bring up a girl
differently from a boy? Muscular gymnastic exercises and health-giving
exertion are unladylike, forsooth!




                       HOUSEHOLD WORK FOR GIRLS.


345. _Do you recommend household work as a means of health for my
daughter?_

Decidedly. Whatever you do, do not make a fine lady of her, or she will
become puny and delicate, listless and miserable. A girl, let her
station be what it might, ought, as soon as she be old enough, to make
her own bed. There is no exercise to expand the figure and to beautify
the shape better than bed-making. Let her make tidy her own room. Let
her use her hands and her arms. Let her, to a great extent, be
self-reliant, and let her wait upon herself. There is nothing vulgar in
her being useful. Let me ask, Of what use are many girls of the present
day? They are utterly useless. Are they happy? No, for the want of
employment they are miserable—I mean, bodily employment, household work.
Many girls, nowadays, unfortunately, are made to look upon a pretty
face, dress, and accomplishments as the only things needed! And, when
they do become women and wives—if ever they do become women and
wives—what miserable, lackadaisical wives, and what senseless, useless
mothers they make!




                     CHOICE OF PROFESSION OR TRADE.


346. _What profession or trade would you recommend a boy of a delicate
or of a consumptive habit to follow?_

If a youth be delicate, it is a common practice among parents either to
put him to some light in-door trade, or, if they can afford it, to one
of the learned professions. Such a practice is absurd, and fraught with
danger. The close confinement of an in-door trade is highly prejudicial
to health. The hard reading requisite to fit a man to fill, for
instance, the sacred office, only increases delicacy of constitution.
The stooping at a desk, in an attorney’s office, is most trying to the
chest. The harass, the anxiety, the disturbed nights, the interrupted
meals, and the intense study necessary to fit a man for the medical
profession, is still more dangerous to health than either law, divinity,
or any in-door trade. “Sir Walter Scott says of the country surgeon,
that he is worse fed and harder wrought than any one else in the parish,
except it be his horse.”

A modern writer, speaking of the life of a medical man, observes: “There
is no career which so rapidly wears away the powers of life, because
there is no other which requires a greater activity of mind and body. He
has to bear the changes of weather, continued fatigue, irregularity in
his meals, and broken rest; to live in the midst of miasma and
contagion. If in the country, he has to traverse considerable distances
on horseback, exposed to wind and storm—to brave all dangers to go to
the relief of suffering humanity. A fearful truth for medical men has
been established by the table of mortality by Dr. Casper, published in
the _British Review_. Of 1000 members of the medical profession, 600
died before their sixty-second year; while of persons leading a quiet
life—such as agriculturists or theologians—the mortality is only 347. If
we take 100 individuals of each of these classes, 43 theologians, 40
agriculturists, 35 clerks, 32 soldiers, will reach their seventieth
year: of 100 professors of the healing art, 24 only will reach that age.
They are the signposts to health; they can show the road to old age, but
rarely tread it themselves.”

If a boy, therefore, be of a delicate or of a consumptive habit, an
out-door calling should be advised, such as that of a farmer, of a
tanner, or a land-surveyor; but, if he be of an inferior station of
society, the trade of a butcher may be recommended. Tanners and butchers
are seldom known to die of consumption.

I cannot refrain from reprobating the too common practice among parents
of bringing up their boys to the professions. The anxieties and the
heartaches which they undergo if they do not succeed (and how can many
of them succeed when there is such a superabundance of candidates?)
materially injure their health. “I very much wonder,” says Addison, “at
the humor of parents, who will not rather choose to place their sons in
a way of life where an honest industry cannot but thrive, than in
stations where the greatest probity, learning, and good sense may
miscarry. How many men are country curates, that might have made
themselves aldermen of London by a right improvement of a smaller sum of
money than what is usually laid out upon a learned education? A sober,
frugal person, of slender parts and a slow apprehension, might have
thrived in trade, though he starves upon physic; as a man would be well
enough pleased to buy silks of one whom he could not venture to feel his
pulse. Vagellius is careful, studious, and obliging, but withal a little
thick-skulled; he has not a single client, but might have had abundance
of customers. The misfortune is, that parents take a liking to a
particular profession, and therefore desire their sons may be of it;
whereas, in so great an affair of life, they should consider the genius
and abilities of their children more than their own inclinations. It is
the great advantage of a trading nation, that there are very few in it
so dull and heavy who may not be placed in stations of life which may
give them an opportunity of making their fortunes. A well-regulated
commerce is not, like law, physic, or divinity, to be overstocked with
hands; but, on the contrary, flourishes by multitudes, and gives
employment to all its professors. Fleets of merchantmen are so many
squadrons of floating shops, that vend our wares and manufactures in all
the markets of the world, and find out chapman under both the tropics.”

347. _Then, do you recommend a delicate youth to be brought up either to
a profession or to a trade?_

Decidedly. There is nothing so injurious for a delicate boy, or for any
one else, as idleness. Work, in moderation, enlivens the spirits, braces
the nerves, and gives tone to the muscles, and thus strengthens the
constitution. Of all miserable people, the idle boy or the idle man is
the most miserable! If you are poor, of course you will bring him up to
some calling; but if you are rich, and your boy is delicate (if he be
not actually in a consumption), you will, if you are wise, still bring
him up to some trade or profession. You will, otherwise, be making a rod
for your own as well as for your son’s back. Oh, what a blessed thing is
work.




                                 SLEEP.


348. _Have you any remarks to make on the sleep of boys and girls?_

Sleeping-rooms are, generally, the smallest in the house, whereas, for
health’s sake, they ought to be the largest. If it be impossible to have
a _large_ bed-room, I should advise a parent to have a dozen or twenty
holes (each about the size of a florin) bored with a center-bit in the
upper part of the chamber-door, and the same number of holes in the
lower part of the door, so as constantly to admit a free current of air
from the passages. If this cannot readily be done, then let the bed-room
door be left ajar all night, a door-chain being on the door to prevent
intrusion; and, in the summer time, during the night, let the
window-sash, to the extent of about two or three inches, be left open.

If there be a dressing-room next to the bed-room, it will be well to
have the dressing-room window, instead of the bed-room window, open at
night. The dressing-room door will regulate the quantity of air to be
admitted into the bed-room, opening it either little or much, as the
weather might be cold or otherwise.

_Fresh air during sleep is indispensable to health_—If a bed-room be
close, the sleep, instead of being calm and refreshing, is broken and
disturbed; and the boy, when he awakes in the morning, feels more
fatigued than when he retired to rest.

If sleep is to be refreshing, the air, then, must be pure, and free from
carbonic acid gas, which is constantly being evolved from the lungs. If
sleep is to be health-giving, the lungs ought to have their proper food,
oxygen,—and not be cheated by giving them instead a poison, carbonic
acid gas.

It would be well for each boy to have a separate room to himself, and
each girl a separate room to herself. If two boys are obliged, from the
smallness of the house, to sleep in one room, and if two girls, from the
same cause, are compelled to occupy the same chamber, by all means let
each one have a _separate_ bed to himself and to herself, as it is so
much more healthy and expedient for both boys and girls to sleep alone.

The roof of the bed should be left open—that is to say, the top of the
bedstead ought not be covered with bed furniture, but should be open to
the ceiling, in order to encourage a free ventilation of air. A
bed-curtain may be allowed on the side of the bed where there are windy
currents of air; otherwise bed-curtains and valances ought on no account
to be allowed. They prevent a free circulation of the air. A youth
should sleep on a horse-hair mattress. Such mattresses greatly improve
the figure and strengthen the frame. During the daytime, provided it
does not rain, the windows must be thrown wide open, and, directly after
he has risen from bed, the clothes ought to be thrown entirely back, in
order that they may become, before the bed be made, well ventilated and
purified by the air:

                  “Do you wish to be healthy?—
                    Then keep the house sweet;
                  As soon as you’re up
                    Shake each blanket and sheet.

                  Leave the beds to get fresh
                    On the close-crowded floor;
                  Let the wind sweep right through—
                    Open window and door.

                  The bad air will rush out
                    As the good air comes in,
                  Just as goodness is stronger
                    And better than sin.

                  Do this, it’s soon done,
                    In the fresh morning air,—
                  It will lighten your labor
                    And lessen your care.

                  You are weary—no wonder;
                    There’s weight and there’s gloom
                  Hanging heavily round
                    In each overfull room.

                  Be sure all the trouble
                    Is profit and gain,
                  For there’s headache, and heartache,
                    And fever, and pain,

                  Hovering round, settling down
                    In the closeness and heat:
                  Let the wind sweep right through
                    Till the air’s fresh and sweet.

                  And more cheerful you’ll feel
                    Through the toil of the day;
                  More refreshed you’ll awake
                    When the night’s pass’d away.”

Plants and flowers ought not to be allowed to remain in a chamber at
night. Experiments have proved that plants and flowers take up, in the
daytime, carbonic acid gas (the refuse of respiration), and give off
oxygen (a gas so necessary and beneficial to health), but give out in
the night season a poisonous exhalation.

Early rising cannot be too strongly insisted upon; nothing is more
conducive to health, and thus to long life. A youth is frequently
allowed to spend the early part of the morning in bed, breathing the
impure atmosphere of a bed-room, when he should be up and about,
inhaling the balmy and health-giving breezes of the morning:

            “Rise with the lark, and with the lark to bed:
            The breath of night’s destructive to the hue
            Of ev’ry flower that blows. Go to the field,
            And ask the humble daisy why it sleeps
            Soon as the sun departs? Why close the eyes
            Of blossoms infinite, long ere the moon
            Her oriental veil puts off? Think why,
            Nor let the sweetest blossom Nature boasts
            Be thus exposed to night’s unkindly damp.
            Well may it droop, and all its freshness lose,
            Compell’d to taste the rank and pois’nous steam
            Of midnight theater and morning ball.
            Give to repose the solemn hour she claims;
            And from the forehead of the morning steal
            The sweet occasion. Oh! there is a charm
            Which morning has, that gives the brow of age
            A smack of youth, and makes the lip of youth
            Shed perfume exquisite. Expect it not,
            Ye who till noon upon a down-bed lie,
            Indulging feverish sleep.”

If early rising be commenced in childhood it becomes a habit, and will
then probably be continued through life. A boy ought on no account to be
roused from his sleep; but as soon as he be awake in the morning, he
should be encouraged to rise. Dozing—that state between sleeping and
waking—is injurious; it enervates both body and mind, and is as
detrimental to health as dram-drinking! But if he rise early, he must go
to bed betimes; it is a bad practice to keep him up until the family
retire to rest. He ought, winter and summer, to seek his pillow by nine
o’clock, and should rise as soon as he awakes in the morning.

Let me urge upon a parent the great importance of _not_ allowing the
chimney of any bed-room, or of any room in the house, to be stopped, as
many are in the habit of doing, to prevent, as _they_ call it, a
draught, but to prevent, as _I_ should call it, health.

349. _How many hours of sleep ought a boy to have?_

This, of course, will depend upon the exercise he takes; but, on an
average he should have every night at least eight hours. It is a
mistaken notion that a boy does _better_ with _little_ sleep. Infants,
children, and youths require more than those who are further advanced in
years; hence old people can frequently do with little sleep. This may in
a measure be accounted for from the quantity of exercise the young take.
Another reason may be, the young have neither pain nor care to keep them
awake: while, on the contrary, the old have frequently one or both:

             “Care keeps his watch on every old man’s eye,
             And where care lodges, sleep will never lie.”




                       ON THE TEETH AND THE GUMS.


350. _What are the best means of keeping the teeth and the gums in a
healthy state?_

I would recommend the teeth and the gums to be well brushed with warm
salt and water, in the proportion of one large teaspoonful of salt to a
tumbler of water. I was induced to try the above plan by the
recommendation of an intelligent American writer.

The salt and water should be used _every night_ at bedtime.

The following is an excellent tooth-powder:

       Take of finely-powdered Peruvian Bark;
                  „            Prepared Coral
                  „            Prepared Chalk;
                  „            Myrrh, of each half an ounce;
                  „            Orris root, a quarter of an ounce;

  Mix them well together in a mortar, and preserve the powder in a
  wide-mouth stoppered bottle.

The teeth ought to be well brushed with the above tooth-powder every
morning.

If the teeth be much decayed, and if, in consequence, the breath be
offensive, two ounces of finely-powdered charcoal, well mixed with the
above ingredients, will be found a valuable addition.

Some persons clean their teeth every morning with soap; if soap be used
it ought to be Castile soap, and if the teeth be not white and clear,
Castile soap is an excellent cleanser of the teeth, and may be used in
lieu of tooth-powder as before recommended.

There are few persons who brush the teeth properly. I will tell you the
right way. First of all procure a tooth-brush of the best make, and of
rather hard bristles, to enable it to penetrate into all the nooks and
corners of the teeth: then, having put a small quantity of warm water
into your mouth, letting the principal of it escape into the basin, dip
your brush in warm water, and if you are about using Castile soap, rub
the brush on a cake of the soap, and then well brush your teeth, first
upward and then downward, then from side to side—from right to left and
from left to right—then the backs of the teeth, then apply the brush to
the tops of the crowns of the teeth both of the upper and of the lower
jaw,—so that _every_ part of each tooth, including the gums, may in turn
be well cleansed, and be well brushed. Be not afraid of using the brush:
a good brushing and dressing will do the teeth and the gums an immensity
of good; it will make the breath sweet, and will preserve the teeth
sound and good. After using the brush the mouth must, of course, be well
rinsed out with warm water.

The finest set of teeth I ever saw in my life belonged to a middle-aged
gentleman; the teeth had neither spot not blemish—they were like
beautiful pearls. He never had toothache in his life, and did not know
what toothache meant! He brushed his teeth, every morning, with soap and
water, in the manner I have previously recommended. I can only say to
you—go and do likewise!

Camphor ought never to be used as an ingredient of tooth-powder, it
makes the teeth brittle. Camphor certainly has the effect of making the
teeth, for a time, look very white; but it is an evanescent beauty.

Tartar is apt to accumulate between and around the teeth; it is better
in such a case _not_ to remove it by scaling instruments, but to adopt
the plan recommended by Dr. Richardson, namely, to well brush the teeth
with pure vinegar and water.




                      PREVENTION OF DISEASE, ETC.


351. _If a boy or a girl show great precocity of intellect, is any organ
likely to become affected?_

A greater quantity of arterial blood is sent to the brain of those who
are prematurely talented, and hence it becomes more than ordinarily
developed. Such advantages are not unmixed with danger; this same
arterial blood may excite and feed inflammation, and either convulsions,
or water on the brain, or insanity, or, at last, idiocy may follow. How
proud a mother is in having a precocious child! How little is she aware
that precocity is frequently an indication of disease!

352. _How can danger in such a case be warded off?_

It behooves a parent, if her son be precocious, to restrain him—to send
him to a quiet country place, free from the excitement of the town; and
when he is sent to school, to give directions to the master that he is
not on any account to tax his intellect (for a master is apt, if he have
a clever boy, to urge him forward); and to keep him from those
institutions where a spirit of rivalry is maintained, and where the
brain is thus kept in a state of constant excitement. Medals and prizes
are well enough for those who have moderate abilities, but dangerous,
indeed, to those who have brilliant ones.

An overworked precocious brain is apt to cause the death of the owner;
and if it does not do so, it in too many instances injures the brain
irreparably, and the possessor of such an organ, from being one of the
most intellectual of children, becomes one of the most commonplace of
men.

Let me urge you, if you have a precocious child, to give, and that
before it be too late, the subject in question your best consideration.

353. _Are precocious boys in their general health usually strong or
delicate?_

Delicate. Nature seems to have given a delicate body to compensate for
the advantages of a talented mind. A precocious youth is predisposed to
consumption, more so than to any other disease. The hard study which he
frequently undergoes excites the disease into action. It is not
desirable, therefore, to have a precocious child. A writer in “Fraser’s
Magazine” speaks very much to the purpose when he says, “Give us
intellectual beef rather than intellectual veal.”

354. _What habit of body is most predisposed to Scrofula?_

He or she who has a moist, cold, fair, delicate, and almost transparent
skin, large prominent blue eyes, protuberant forehead, light-brown or
auburn hair, rosy cheeks, pouting lips, milk-white teeth, long neck,
high shoulders, small, flat, and contracted chest, tumid bowels, large
joints, thin limbs, and flabby muscles, is the person most predisposed
to scrofula. The disease is not entirely confined to the above;
sometimes he or she who has black hair, dark eyes and complexion, is
subject to it, but yet far less frequently than the former. It is a
remarkable fact that the most talented are the most prone to scrofula,
and being thus clever their intellects are too often cultivated at the
expense of their health. In infancy and childhood, either water on the
brain or mesenteric disease; in youth, pulmonary consumption is
frequently their doom. They are like shining meteors; their life is
brilliant, but short.

355. _How may Scrofula be warded off?_

Strict attention to the rules of health is the means to prevent
scrofula. Books, unless as an amusement, ought to be discarded. The
patient must almost live in the open air, and his residence should be a
healthy country place, where the air is dry and bracing; if it be at a
farm-house, in a salubrious neighborhood, so much the better. In
selecting a house for a patient predisposed to scrofula, _good pure
water should be an important requisite_—indeed for every one who values
his health. Early rising in such a case is most beneficial. Wine,
spirits, and all fermented liquors ought to be avoided. Beef-steaks and
mutton-chops in abundance, and plenty of milk and farinaceous food—such
as rice, sago, arrow-root, etc.—should be his diet.

Scrofula, if the above rules be strictly and perseveringly followed, may
be warded off; but there must be no half measures, no trying to serve
two masters—to cultivate at the same time the health and the intellect.
The brain, until the body becomes strong, must _not_ be taxed. “You may
prevent scrofula by care; but that some children are originally
predisposed to the disease there cannot be the least doubt, and in such
cases the education and the habits of youth should be so directed as to
ward off a complaint the effects of which are so frequently fatal.”

356. _But suppose the disease to be already formed, what must then be
done?_

The plan recommended above must still be pursued, not by fits and
starts, but steadily and continuously, for it is a complaint that
requires a vast deal of patience and great perseverance. Warm and cold
sea bathing in such a case is generally most beneficial. In a patient
with confirmed scrofula it will of course be necessary to consult a
skillful and experienced doctor.

But do not allow, without a second opinion, any plan to be adopted that
will weaken the system, which is already too much depressed. No, rather
build up the body by good nourishing diet (as previously recommended),
by cod-liver oil, by a dry, bracing atmosphere, such as either Brighton,
or Ramsgate, Llandudno; or, if the lungs be delicate, by a more
sheltered coast, such as either St. Leonard’s or Torquay.

Let no active purging, no mercurials, no violent, desperate remedies be
allowed. If the patient cannot be cured _without_ them, I am positive
that he will not be cured _with_ them.

But do not despair; many scrofulous patients are cured by time and by
judicious treatment. But if desperate remedies are to be used, the poor
patient had better _by far_ be left to Nature. “Let me fall now into the
hand of the LORD; for very great are his mercies: but let me not fall
into the hand of man.”

357. _Have you any remarks to make on a girl stooping?_

A girl ought never to be allowed to stoop: stooping spoils the figure,
weakens the chest, and interferes with the digestion. If she cannot help
stooping, you may depend upon it that she is in bad health, and that a
medical man ought to be consulted. As soon as her health is improved the
dancing-master should be put in requisition, and calisthenic and
gymnastic exercises should be resorted to. Horse exercise and swimming
in such a case are very beneficial. The girl should live well, on good
nourishing diet, and not be too closely confined either to the house or
to her lessons. She ought during the night to lie on a horse-hair
mattress, and during the day, for two or three hours, flat on her back
on a reclining board. Stooping, if neglected, is very likely to lead to
consumption.

358. _If a boy be round-shouldered and slouching in his gait, what ought
to be done?_

Let him be drilled; there is nothing more likely to benefit him than
drilling. You never see a soldier round-shouldered nor slouching in his
gait. He walks every inch like a man. Look at the difference in
appearance between a country laborer and a soldier! It is the drilling
that makes the difference. “Oh, for a drill-sergeant to teach them to
stand upright, and to turn out their toes, and to get rid of that
slouching, hulking gait, which gives such a look of clumsiness and
stupidity!”

359. _My daughter has grown out of shape, she has grown on one side, her
spine is not straight, and her ribs bulge out more on the one side than
on the other: what is the cause, and can anything be done to remedy the
deformity?_

The causes of this lateral curvature of the spine, and consequent
bulging out of the ribs that you have just now described, arise either
from delicacy of constitution, from the want of proper exercise, from
too much learning, or from too little play, or from not sufficient or
proper nourishment for a rapidly-growing body. I am happy to say that
such a case, by judicious treatment, can generally be cured—namely, by
gymnastic exercises, such as the hand-swing, the fly-pole, the patent
parlor gymnasium, the chest expander, the skipping-rope, the swimming
bath; all sorts of out-door games, such as croquet, archery, etc.; by
plenty of good nourishment, by making her a child of Nature, by letting
her almost live in the open air, and by throwing books to the winds. But
let me strongly urge you not, unless ordered by an experienced surgeon,
to allow any mechanical restraints or appliances to be used. If she be
made strong, the muscles themselves will pull both the spine and the
ribs into their proper places, more especially if judicious games and
exercises (as I have before advised), and other treatment of a
strengthening and bracing nature, which a medical man will indicate to
you, be enjoined. Mechanical appliances will, if not judiciously
applied, and in a proper case, waste away the muscles, and will thus
increase the mischief; if they cause the ribs to be pushed in in one
place, they will bulge them out in another, until, instead of being one,
there will be a series of deformities. No, the giving of strength and
the judicious exercising of the muscles are, for a lateral curvature of
the spine and the consequent bulging out of one side of the ribs, the
proper remedies, and, in the majority of cases, are most effectual, and
quite sufficient for the purpose.

I think it well to strongly impress upon a mother’s mind the great
importance of early treatment. If the above advice be followed, every
curvature in the beginning might be cured. Cases of several years’
standing might, with judicious treatment, be wonderfully relieved.

Bear in mind, then, that if the girl is to be made straight, she is
first of all to be made strong; the latter, together with the proper
exercises of the muscles, will lead to the former; and the _earlier_ a
medical man takes it in hand, the more rapid, the more certain, and the
more effectual will be the cure.

An inveterate, long-continued and neglected case of curvature of the
spine and bulging out of the ribs on one side might require mechanical
appliances, but such a case can only be decided on by an experienced
surgeon, who ought always, _in the first place_, to be consulted.

360. _Is a slight spitting of blood to be looked upon as a dangerous
symptom?_

Spitting of blood is always to be looked upon with suspicion, even when
a youth appears in other respects to be in good health; it is frequently
the forerunner of consumption. It might be said that, by mentioning the
fact, I am unnecessarily alarming a parent, but it would be a false
kindness if I did not do so:

                   “I must be cruel only to be kind.”

Let me ask when is consumption to be cured? Is it at the onset, or is it
when it is confirmed? If a mother had been more generally aware that
spitting of blood was frequently the forerunner of consumption, she
would, in the management of her offsprings, have taken greater
precautions; she would have made everything give way to the preservation
of their health; and, in many instances, she would have been amply
repaid by having the lives of her children spared to her. We frequently
hear of patients in _confirmed_ consumption being sent to Menton, to
Madeira, and to other foreign parts. Can anything be more cruel or
absurd? If there be any disease that requires the comforts of home—and
truly may an Englishman’s dwelling he called _home_!—and good nursing
more than another, it is consumption.

361. _What is the death-rate of Consumption in England? At what age does
Consumption most frequently occur? Are girls more liable to it than
boys? What are the symptoms of this disease?_

It is asserted, on good authority, that there always are, in England,
78,000 cases of consumption, and that the yearly death-rate of this fell
disease alone is 39,000! Consumption more frequently shows itself
between the ages of fourteen and twenty-one: after then, the liability
to the disease gradually diminishes, until at the age of forty-five it
becomes comparatively rare. Boys are more prone to this complaint than
girls. Some of the most important symptoms of pulmonary consumption are
indicated by the stethoscope; but, as I am addressing a mother, it
would, of course, be quite out of place to treat of such signs in
Conversations of this kind. The symptoms it might be well for a parent
to recognize, in order that she may seek aid early, I will presently
describe. It is perfectly hopeless to expect to cure consumption unless
advice be sought at the _onset_, as the only effectual good in this
disease is to be done _at first_.

It might be well to state that consumption creeps on insidiously. One of
the earliest symptoms of this dreadful scourge is a slight, dry, short
cough, attended with tickling and irritation at the top of the throat.
This cough generally occurs in the morning; but, after some time, comes
on at night, and gradually throughout the day and the night. Frequently
during the early stage of the disease _a slight spitting of blood
occurs_. Now this is a most dangerous symptom; indeed, I may go so far
as to say that, as a rule, it is almost a sure sign that the patient is
in the _first_ stage of a consumption.

There is usually hoarseness, not constant, but coming on if the patient
be tired, or toward the evening; there is also a sense of lassitude and
depression, shortness of breathing, a feeling of being quickly
wearied—more especially on the slightest exertion. The hair of a
consumptive person usually falls off, and what little remains is weak
and poor; the joints of the fingers become enlarged, or clubbed as it is
sometimes called; the patient loses flesh, and, after some time,
night-sweats make their appearance; then we may know that hectic fever
has commenced.

Hectic begins with chilliness, which is soon followed by flushings of
the face, and by burning heat of the hands and feet, especially of the
palms and the soles. This is soon succeeded by perspirations. The
patient has generally, during the day, two decided paroxysms of hectic
fever—the one at noon, which lasts about five hours, the other in the
evening, which is more severe, and ends in violent perspirations, which
perspirations continue the whole night through. He may, during the day,
have several attacks of hectic flushes of the face, especially after
eating; at one moment he complains of being too hot, and rushes to the
cool air; the next moment he is too cold, and almost scorches himself by
sitting too near the fire. Whenever the circumscribed hectic flush is on
the cheek, it looks as though the cheek had been painted with vermilion,
then is the time when the palms of the hands are burning hot.

The expectoration at first is merely mucus, but after a time it assumes
a characteristic appearance; it has a roundish, flocculent, wooly form,
each portion of phlegm keeping, as it were, distinct; and if the
expectoration be stirred in water, it has a milk-like appearance. The
patient is commonly harassed by frequent bowel complaints, which rob him
of what little strength he has left. The feet and ankles swell. The
perspiration, as before remarked, comes on in the evening, continues all
night, more especially toward morning and while the patient is asleep;
during the time he is awake, even at night, he seldom sweats much. The
thrush generally shows itself toward the close of the disease, attacking
the tongue, the tonsils, and the soft palate, _and is a sure harbinger
of approaching death_. Emaciation rapidly sets in.

If we consider the immense engines of destruction at work—viz., the
colliquative (melting) sweats, the violent bowel complaints, the vital
parts that are affected, the harassing cough, the profuse expectoration,
the hectic fever, the distressing exertion of struggling to breathe,—we
cannot be surprised that “consumption had hung out her red flag of no
surrender,” and that death soon closes the scene. In girls, provided
they have been previously regular, menstruation gradually declines, and
then entirely disappears.

362. _What are the causes of Consumption?_

The _predisposing_ causes of consumption are the scrofulous habit of
body, hereditary predisposition, narrow or contracted chest, deformed
spine, delicacy of constitution, bad and scanty diet, or food containing
but little nourishment, impure air, close in-door confinement in
schools, in shops, and in factories, ill-ventilated apartments,
dissipation, late hours, over-taxing with book learning the growing
brain, thus producing debility, want of proper out-door exercises and
amusements, tight lacing—indeed, anything and everything that either
will debilitate the constitution, or will interfere with or will impede
the proper action of the lungs, will be the predisposing causes of this
fearful and lamentable disease.

An ill, poor, and insufficient diet is the mother of many diseases, and
especially of consumption: “Whatsoever was the father of a disease, an
ill diet was the mother.”

The most common _exciting_ causes of consumption are slighted colds,
neglected inflammation of the chest, long continuance of influenza,
sleeping in damp beds, allowing wet clothes to dry on the body,
unhealthy employments—such as needle grinding, pearl-button making, etc.

363. _Supposing a youth to have spitting of blood, what precautions
would you take to prevent it from ending in Consumption?_

I should let his health be the first consideration; I should throw books
to the winds; if he be at school, I should advise you to take him away;
if he be in trade, I should cancel his indentures; if he be in the town,
I should send him to a sheltered healthy spot in the country, or to the
south coast; as, for instance, either to St. Leonards-on-Sea, or to
Torquay.

I should be particular in his clothing, taking especial care to keep his
chest and feet warm. If he did not already wear flannel waistcoats, let
it be winter or summer, I should recommend him immediately to do so; if
it be winter, I should advise him also to take to _flannel_ drawers. The
feet must be carefully attended to; they ought to be kept both warm and
dry, the slightest dampness of either shoes or stockings should cause
them to be immediately changed. If a boy, he ought to wear
double-breasted waistcoats; if a girl, high dresses.

The diet must be nutritious and generous; he should be encouraged to eat
plentifully of beef and mutton. There is nothing better for breakfast,
where it agrees, than milk; indeed, it may be frequently made to agree
by previously boiling it. Good home-brewed ale or sound porter ought, in
moderation, to be taken. Wine and spirits must on no account be allowed.
I caution parents in this particular, as many have an idea that wine, in
such cases, is strengthening, and that _rum_ and milk is a good thing
either to cure or to prevent a cough!

If it be summer, let him be much in the open air, avoiding the evening
and the night air. If it be winter, he should, unless the weather be
mild for the season, keep within doors. Particular attention ought to
be paid to the point the wind is in, as he should not be allowed to go
out if it is either in the north, in the east, or in the northeast;
the latter is more especially dangerous. If it be spring, and the
weather be favorable, or summer or autumn, change of air, more
especially to the south coast—to the Isle of Wight, for instance—would
be desirable; indeed, in a case of spitting of blood, I know of no
remedy so likely to ward off that formidable, and, generally,
intractable complaint—consumption—as change of air. The beginning of
the autumn is, of course, the best season for visiting the coast. It
would be advisable, at the commencement of October, to send him either
to Italy, to the south of France—to Mentone—or to the mild parts of
England—more especially either to Hastings, or to Torquay, or to the
Isle of Wight—to winter. But remember, if he be actually in a
_confirmed_ consumption, I would not, on any account whatever, let him
leave his home; as then the comforts of home will far, very far
outweigh any benefit of change of air.

364. _Suppose a youth to be much predisposed to a Sore Throat, what
precautions ought he to take to ward off future attacks?_

He must use every morning thorough ablution of the body, beginning
cautiously; that is to say, commencing with the neck one morning, then
by degrees, morning after morning, sponging a larger surface, until the
whole of the body be sponged. The chill at first must be taken off the
water; gradually the temperature ought to be lowered until the water be
quite cold, taking care to rub the body thoroughly dry with a coarse
towel—a Turkish rubber being the best for the purpose.

He ought to bathe his throat externally every night and morning with
lukewarm salt and water, the temperature of which must be gradually
reduced until at length no warm water be added. He should gargle his
throat either with barm, vinegar, and sage tea, or with salt and
water—two teaspoonfuls of table salt dissolved in a tumbler of water. A
wineglassful of barm, a wineglassful of vinegar, and the remaining sage
tea, to make a half-pint bottle of gargle. He ought to harden himself by
taking plenty of exercise in the open air. He must, as much as possible,
avoid either sitting or standing in a draught; if he be in one he should
face it. He ought to keep his feet warm and dry. He should take as
little aperient medicine as possible, avoiding especially both calomel
and blue-pill. As he grows up to manhood he ought to allow his beard to
grow, as such would be a natural covering for his throat: I have known
great benefit to arise from this simple plan. The fashion is now to wear
the beard, not to use the razor at all, and a sensible fashion I
consider it to be. The finest respirator in the world is the beard. The
beard is not only good for sore throats, but for weak chests. The
wearing of the beard is a splendid innovation; it saves no end of
trouble, is very beneficial to health, and is a great improvement “to
the human face divine.”

365. _Have you any remarks to make on the almost universal habit of boys
and of very young men smoking?_

I am not now called upon to give an opinion of the effects of tobacco
smoking on the middle-aged and on the aged. I am addressing a mother as
to the desirability of her sons, when boys, being allowed to smoke. I
consider tobacco smoking one of the most injurious and deadly habits a
boy or a young man can indulge in. It contracts the chest and weakens
the lungs, thus predisposing to consumption. It impairs the stomach,
thus producing indigestion. It debilitates the brain and nervous system,
thus inducing epileptic fits and nervous depression. It stunts the
growth, and is one cause of the present race of pigmies. It makes the
young lazy and disinclined for work. It is one of the greatest curses of
the present day. The following cases prove, more than any argument can
prove, the dangerous and deplorable effects of a boy smoking. I copy the
first case from _Public Opinion_. “The _France_ mentions the following
fact as a proof of the evil consequences of smoking for boys: ‘A pupil
in one of the colleges, only twelve years of age, was some time since
seized with epileptic fits, which became worse and worse in spite of all
the remedies employed. At last it was discovered that the lad had been
for two years past secretly indulging in the weed. Effectual means were
adopted to prevent his obtaining tobacco, and he soon recovered.’”

The other case occurred about five years ago, in my own practice. The
patient was a youth of nineteen. He was an inveterate smoker. From being
a bright, intelligent lad, he was becoming idiotic, and epileptic fits
were supervening. I painted to him, in vivid colors, the horrors of his
case, and assured him that if he still persisted in his bad practices,
he would soon become a driveling idiot! I at length, after some trouble
and contention, prevailed upon him to desist from smoking altogether. He
rapidly lost all epileptic symptoms, his face soon resumed its wonted
intelligence, and his mind asserted its former power. He remains well to
this day, and is now a married man with a family.

366. _What are the best methods to restrain a violent Bleeding from the
Nose?_

Do not interfere with a bleeding from the nose unless it be violent. A
bleeding from the nose is frequently an effort of Nature to relieve
itself, and therefore, unless it be likely to weaken the patient, ought
not to be restrained. If it be necessary to restrain the bleeding, press
firmly for a few minutes the nose between the finger and the thumb—this
alone will often stop the bleeding; if it should not, then try what
bathing the nose and the forehead and the nape of the neck with water
quite cold from the pump will do. If that does not succeed, try the
old-fashioned remedy of putting a cold large door-key down the back. If
these plans fail, try the effects either of powdered alum or of powdered
matico, used after the fashion of snuff—a pinch or two, either of the
one or the other, or of both, should be sniffed up the bleeding nostril.
If these should not answer the purpose, although they almost invariably
will, apply a large lump of ice to the nape of the neck, and put a small
piece of ice into the patient’s mouth for him to suck.

If these methods do not succeed, plunge the hand and the forearm into
cold water, keep them in for a few minutes, then take them out, and
either hold or let be held up the arms and hands high above the head;
this plan has frequently succeeded when others have failed. Let the room
be kept cool, throw open the windows, and do not have many in the room
to crowd around the patient.

Doubtless, Dr. Richardson’s local anæsthetic—the ether spray—playing
from a few seconds to a minute _on_ the nose and _up_ the bleeding
nostril, would act most beneficially in a severe case of this kind, and
would, before resorting to the disagreeable operation of plugging the
nose, deserve a trial. I respectfully submit this suggestion to my
medical brethren. The ether—rectified ether—used for the spray ought to
be perfectly pure, and of the specific gravity of 0.723.

If the above treatment does not soon succeed, send for a medical man, as
more active means, such as plugging of the nostrils—_Which is not done
unless in extreme cases_—might be necessary.

But before plugging of the nose is resorted to, it will be well to try
the effects of a cold solution of alum:

                    Take of—Powdered Alum, one drachm;
                             Water, half a pint;

  To make a Lotion.

A little of the lotion should be put into the palm of the hand and
sniffed up the bleeding nostril; or, if that does not succeed, some of
the lotion ought, by means of a syringe, to be syringed up the nose.

367. _In case of a young lady Fainting, what had better be done?_

Lay her flat upon her back, taking care that the head be as low as or
lower than the body; throw open the windows; do not crowd around her;
unloose her dress as quickly as possible; ascertain if she have been
guilty of tight lacing, for fainting is sometimes produced by that
reprehensible practice. Apply smelling salts to her nostrils; if they be
not at hand, burn a piece of rag under her nose; dash cold water upon
her face; throw open the window; fan her; and do not, as is generally
done, crowd round her, and thus prevent a free circulation of air.
Shakspeare knew the great importance of not crowding around a patient
who has fainted. He says:

     “So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
     Come all to help him, and so stop the air
     By which he should revive.”
                             _Measure for Measure_, Act ii. sc. 4.

As soon as she can swallow, give her either a draught of _cold_ water,
or a glass of wine, or a teaspoonful of sal-volatile in a wineglassful
of water.

_To prevent fainting for the future._—I would recommend early hours;
country air and exercise; the stays, if worn at all, to be worn slack;
attention to diet; avoidance of wine, beer, spirits, excitement, and
fashionable amusements.

Sometimes the cause of a young lady fainting is either a disordered
stomach or a constipated state of the bowels.

If the fainting have been caused by _disordered stomach_, it may be
necessary to stop the supplies, and give the stomach, for a day or two,
but little to do; a fast will frequently prevent the necessity of giving
medicine. Of course, if the stomach be _much_ disordered, it will be
desirable to consult a medical man.

If your daughter’s fainting have originated from a _costive state of the
bowels_ (another frequent cause of fainting), I beg to refer you to a
subsequent Conversation, in which I will give you a list of remedies for
the prevention and the treatment of constipation.

A young lady’s fainting occasionally arises from debility—from downright
weakness of the constitution; then the best remedies will be change of
air to the coast, good nourishing diet, and the following strengthening
mixture:

        Take of—Muriated Tincture of Iron, one drachm and a half;
                 Tincture of Calumba, six drachms;
                 Distilled Water, seven ounces.

  Two tablespoonfuls of this mixture to be taken three times a day.

Or, for a change, the following:

             Take of—Wine of Iron, one ounce and a half;
                      Distilled Water, six ounces and a half:

  To make a Mixture. Two tablespoonfuls to be taken three times a day.

Iron medicines ought always to be taken _after_ instead of _before_ a
meal. The best times of the day for taking either of the above mixtures
will be eleven o’clock, four o’clock, and seven o’clock.

368. _You had a great objection to a mother administering calomel either
to an infant or to a child, have you the same objection to a boy or a
girl taking it when he or she requires an aperient?_

Equally as great. It is my firm belief that the frequent use, or rather
the abuse, of calomel and of other preparations of mercury, is often a
source of liver disease, and an exciter of scrofula. It is a medicine of
great value in some diseases, when given by a _judicious_ medical man;
but, at the same time, it is a drug of great danger when either given
indiscriminately, or when too often prescribed. I will grant that in
liver diseases it frequently gives temporary relief; but when a patient
has once commenced the regular use of it, he cannot do without it,
until, at length, the _functional_ ends in _organic_ disease of the
liver. The use of calomel predisposes to cold, and thus frequently
brings on either inflammation or consumption. Family aperient pills
ought never to contain, in any form whatever, a particle of mercury.

369. _Will you give me a list of remedies for the prevention and for the
cure of Constipation?_

If you find it necessary to give to your son or to your daughter
aperient medicine, the mildest ought to be selected; for instance, an
agreeable and an effectual one is an electuary composed of the following
ingredients:

             Take of—Best picked Alexandria Senna, one ounce;
                      Best Figs, two ounces;
                      Best Raisins (stoned), two ounces:

  All chopped very fine. The size of a nutmeg or two to be occasionally
  eaten.

Or, one or two teaspoonfuls of compound confection of senna (lenitive
electuary) may occasionally, early in the morning, be taken. Or, for a
change, a teaspoonful of Henry’s magnesia, in half a tumblerful of warm
water. If this should not be sufficiently active, a teaspoonful of Epsom
salts should be given with the magnesia. A Seidlitz powder forms another
safe and mild aperient; or one or two compound rhubarb pills may be
given at bedtime. The following prescription for a pill, where an
aperient is absolutely necessary, is a mild, gentle, and effective one
for the purpose:

       Take of—Extract of Socotrine Aloes, eight grains;
                Compound Extract of Colocynth, forty-eight grains:
                Hard Soap, twenty-four grains;
                Treacle, a sufficient quantity:

  To make twenty-four Pills. One or two to be taken at bedtime
  occasionally.

But, after all, the best opening medicines are—cold ablutions every
morning of the whole body; attention to diet; variety of food;
bran-bread; grapes; stewed prunes; [For the best way of stewing prunes,
see question 244.] French plums; Muscatel raisins; figs; fruit, both
cooked and raw—if it be ripe and sound; oatmeal porridge; lentil powder,
in the form of Du Barry’s Arabica Revalenta; vegetables of all kinds,
especially spinach; exercise in the open air; early rising; daily
visiting the water-closet at a certain hour—there is nothing keeps the
bowels open so regularly and well as establishing the habit of visiting
the water-closet at a certain hour every morning; and the other rules of
health specified in these Conversations. If more attention were paid to
these points, poor school-boys and school-girls would not be compelled
to swallow such nauseous and disgusting messes as they usually are.

Should these plans not succeed (although in the majority of cases, with
patience and perseverance, they will), I would advise an enema once or
twice a week, either simply of warm water, or of one made of gruel,
table salt, and olive oil, in the proportion of two tablespoonfuls of
salt, two of oil, and a pint of warm gruel, which a boy may administer
to himself, or a girl to herself, by means of a proper enema apparatus.

Hydropathy is oftentimes very serviceable in preventing and in curing
costiveness; and as it will sometimes prevent the necessity of
administering medicine, it is both a boon and a blessing. “Hydropathy
also supplies us with various remedies for constipation. From the simple
glass of cold water, taken early in the morning, to the various douches
and sea-baths, a long list of useful appliances might be made out, among
which we may mention the ‘wet compresses’ worn for three hours over the
abdomen [bowels], with a gutta-percha covering.”

I have here a word or two to say to a mother who is always physicking
her family. It is an unnatural thing to be constantly dosing either a
child or any one else with medicine. One would suppose that some people
were only sent into the world to be physicked! If more care were paid to
the rules of health, very little medicine would be required! This is a
bold assertion; but I am confident that it is a true one. It is a
strange admission for a medical man to make, but, nevertheless, my
convictions compel me to avow it.

370. _What is the reason girls are so subject to Costiveness?_

The principal reason why girls suffer more from costiveness than boys,
is that their habits are more sedentary; as the best opening medicines
in the world are an abundance of exercise, of muscular exertion, and of
fresh air.

Unfortunately, poor girls in this enlightened age must be engaged,
sitting all the while, several hours every day at fancy work, the piano,
and other accomplishments; they, consequently, have little time for
exercise of any kind. The bowels, as a matter of course, become
constipated; they are, therefore, dosed with pills, with black draughts,
with brimstone and treacle—oh! the abomination!—and with medicines of
that class, almost _ad infinitum_. What is the consequence? Opening
medicines, by constant repetition, lose their effects, and, therefore,
require to be made stronger and still stronger, until at length the
strongest will scarcely act at all, and the poor unfortunate girl, when
she becomes a woman, _if she ever does become one_, is spiritless,
heavy, dull, and listless, requiring daily doses of physic, until she
almost lives on medicine!

All this misery and wretchedness proceed from Nature’s laws having been
set at defiance, from _artificial_ means taking the place of _natural_
ones—from a mother adopting as her rule and guide fashion and folly,
rather than reason and common sense. When will a mother awake from her
folly and stupidity? This is strong language to address to a lady; but
it is not stronger than the subject demands.

Mothers of England! do, let me entreat you, ponder well upon what I have
said. Do rescue your girls from the bondage of fashion and folly, which
is worse than the bondage of the Egyptian task-masters; for the
Israelites did, in making bricks without straw, work in the open air—“So
the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to
gather stubble instead of straw;” but your girls, many of them at least,
have no work, either in the house or in the open air—they have no
exercise whatever. They are poor, drawling, dawdling, miserable
nonentities, with muscles, for the want of proper exercise, like
ribbons, and with faces, for the lack of fresh air, as white as a sheet
of paper. What a host of charming girls are yearly sacrificed at the
shrine of fashion and of folly!

Another, and a frequent cause of costiveness, is the bad habit of
disobeying the call of having the bowels opened. The moment there is the
slightest inclination to relieve the bowels, _instantly_ ought it to be
attended to, or serious results will follow. Let me urge a mother to
instill into her daughter’s mind the importance of this advice.

371. _Young people are subject to Pimples on the Face, what is the
remedy?_

These hard red pimples (_acne_) are a common and an obstinate affection
of the skin, principally affecting the forehead, the temples, the nose,
and the cheeks; occasionally attacking the neck, the shoulders, the
back, and the chest; and as they more frequently affect the young, from
the age of 15 to 35, and are disfiguring, they cause much annoyance.
“These pimples are so well known by most persons as scarcely to need
description; they are conical, red, and hard; after awhile, they become
white, and yellow at the point, then discharge a thick yellow-colored
matter, mingled with a whitish substance, and become covered by a hard,
brown scab, and lastly, disappear very slowly, sometimes very
imperfectly, and often leaving an ugly scar behind them. To these
symptoms are not unfrequently added considerable pain, and always much
unsightliness. When these little cones have the black head of a ‘grub’
at their point, they constitute the variety termed _spotted acne_. These
latter often remain stationary for months, without increasing or
becoming red; but when they inflame, they are nowise different in their
course from the common kind.”

I find, in these cases, great benefit to be derived from bathing the
face, night and morning, with strong salt and water—a tablespoonful of
table salt to a teacupful of water; by paying attention to the bowels;
by living on plain, wholesome, nourishing food; and by taking a great
deal of out-door exercise. Sea bathing, in these cases, is often very
beneficial. Grubs and worms have a mortal antipathy to salt.

372. _What is the cause of a Gum-boil?_

A decayed root of a tooth, which causes inflammation and abscess of the
gum, which abscess breaks, and thus becomes a gum-boil.

373. _What is the treatment of a Gum-boil?_

Foment the outside of the face with a hot chamomile and poppy-head
fomentation, and apply to the gum-boil, between the cheek and the gum, a
small white-bread and milk poultice, which renew frequently.

  Four poppy-heads and four ounces of chamomile blows to be boiled in
  four pints of water for half an hour, and then to be strained to make
  the fomentation.

  Cut a piece of bread, about the size of the little finger—without
  breaking it into crumb—pour boiling hot milk upon it, cover it over,
  and let it stand for five minutes, then apply the soaked bread over
  the gum-boil, letting it rest between the cheek and the gum.

As soon as the gum-boil has become quiet, _by all means_ have the
affected tooth extracted, or it might cause disease, and consequently
serious injury of the jaw; and whenever the patient catches cold there
will be a renewal of the inflammation, of the abscess, and of the
gum-boil, and as a matter of course, renewed pain, trouble, and
annoyance. Moreover, decayed fangs of teeth often cause the breath to be
offensive.

374. _What is the best remedy for a Corn?_

The best remedy for a _hard corn_ is to remove it. The usual method of
cutting, or of paring a corn away, is erroneous. The following is the
right way; Cut with a _sharp_ pair of pointed scissors around the
circumference of the corn. Work gradually round and round and toward the
center. When you have for some considerable distance well loosened the
edges, you can either with your finger or with a pair of forceps
generally remove the corn bodily, and that with little pain and without
the loss of any blood.

If the corn be properly and wholly removed, it will leave a small cavity
or round hole in the center, where the blood-vessels and the nerve of
the corn—vulgarly called the root—really were, and which, in point of
fact, constituted the very existence or the essence of the corn.
Moreover, if the corn be entirely removed, you will, without giving
yourself the slightest pain, be able to squeeze the part affected
between your finger and thumb.

_Hard corns_ on the sole of the foot and on the sides of the foot are
best treated by filing—by filing them with a sharp cutting file (flat on
one side and convex on the other), neither too coarse nor too fine in
the cutting. The corn ought, once every day, to be filed, and should
daily be continued until you experience a slight pain, which tells you
that the end of the corn is approaching. Many cases of _hard corn_, that
have resisted every other plan of treatment, have been _entirely_ cured
by means of the file. One great advantage of the file is, it cannot
possibly do any harm, and may be used by a timid person, by one who
would not readily submit to any cutting instrument being applied to the
corn.

The file, if properly used, is an effectual remedy for a _hard corn_ on
the sole of the foot. I myself have seen the value of it in several
cases, particularly in one case, that of an old gentleman of
ninety-five, who had a corn on the sole of his foot for upwards of half
a century, and which had resisted numerous, indeed, almost innumerable,
remedies; at length I recommended the file, and after a few applications
entire relief was obtained, and the corn was completely eradicated.

The corns between the toes are called _soft corns_. A _soft corn_ is
quickly removed by the strong acetic acid—acid. acetic. fort.—which
ought to be applied to the corn every night by means of a camel’s-hair
brush. The toes should be kept asunder for a few minutes, in order that
the acid may soak in; then apply between the toes a small piece of
cotton-wool.

_Hard corns_, then, on the sole and on the side of the foot, are best
treated by the file; _hard corns_ on the toes by the scissors; and _soft
corns_ between the toes by the strong acetic acid.

In the generality of cases the plans recommended above, if properly
performed, will effect a cure; but if the corn, from pressure or from
any other cause, should return, remove it again and proceed as before
directed. If the corn have been caused either by tight or by ill-fitting
shoes, the only way to prevent a recurrence is, of course, to have the
shoes properly made by a clever shoemaker—by one who thoroughly
understands his business, and who will have a pair of lasts made
purposely for the feet.

As long as fashion, instead of common sense, is followed in the making
of both boots and shoes, men and women will as a matter of course suffer
from corns.

It has often struck me as singular, when all the professions and trades
are so overstocked, that there should be, as there is in every large
town, such a want of chiropodists (corn-cutters)—of respectable
chiropodists—of men who would charge a _fixed_ sum for every visit the
patient may make; for instance, to every working-man a shilling, and to
every gentleman half a crown or five shillings for _each_ sitting, and
not for _each_ corn (which latter system is a most unsatisfactory way of
doing business). I am quite sure that if such a plan were adopted, every
town of any size in the kingdom would employ regularly one chiropodist
at least. However we might dislike some few of the American customs, we
may copy them with advantage in this particular—namely, in having a
regular staff of chiropodists both in civil and in military life.

The German method of making boots and shoes is a capital one for the
prevention of corns, as the boots and shoes are made scientifically, to
fit a _real_ and not an _ideal_ foot.

One of the best preventives of, as well as of the best remedies for,
corns, especially of soft corns between the toes, is washing the feet
every morning, as recommended in a previous Conversation, taking
especial care to wash with the thumb, and afterward to wipe with the
towel between each toe. [See _Youth_—_Ablution_.]

375. _What is the best remedy to destroy a Wart?_

Pure nitric acid, carefully applied to the wart by means of a small
stick of cedar wood, a camel’s-hair pencil-holder, every other day, will
soon destroy it. A very small quantity of pure nitric acid—just a drain
at the bottom of a stoppered bottle—is all that is needed, and which may
be procured of a chemist.

Care must be taken that the acid does not touch the healthy skin, or it
will act as a caustic to it.

The nitric acid should be preserved in a stoppered bottle, and must be
put out of the reach of children.

376. _What is the best remedy for Tender Feet, for Sweaty Feet, and for
Smelling Feet?_

Cold water: bathing the feet in cold water, beginning with tepid water
but gradually from day to day reducing the warm until the water be quite
cold. A large nursery-basin, one-third full of water, ought to be placed
on the floor, and one foot at a time should be put in the water washing
the while with a sponge the foot, and with the thumb between each toe.
Each foot should remain in the water about half a minute. The feet ought
after each washing to be well dried, taking care to dry with the towel
between each toe. The above process must be repeated at least once every
day, every morning, and, if the annoyance be great, every night as well.
A clean pair of stockings ought in these cases to be put on daily, as
perfect cleanliness is absolutely necessary both to afford relief and to
effect a cure.

If the feet be tender, or if there be either bunions or corns, the shoes
and the boots made according to the German method (which are fashioned
according to the actual shape of the foot) should alone be worn.

377. _What are the causes of so many young ladies of the present day
being weak, nervous, and unhappy?_

The principal causes are—ignorance of the laws of health, Nature’s laws
being set at naught by fashion and by folly, by want of fresh air and
exercise, by want of occupation, and by want of self-reliance. Weak,
nervous, and unhappy! Well they might be! What have they to make them
strong and happy? Have they work to do to brace the muscles? Have they
occupation—useful, active occupation—to make them happy? No! they have
neither the one nor the other!

378. _What diseases are girls most subject to?_

The diseases peculiar to girls are—Chlorosis, Greensickness, and
Hysterics.

379. _What are the usual causes of Chlorosis?_

Chlorosis is caused by torpor and debility of the whole frame,
_especially of the womb_. It is generally produced by scanty or by
improper food, by the want of air and exercise, and by too close
application within doors. Here we have the same tale over again—close
application within doors, and the want of fresh air and exercise! When
will the eyes of a mother be opened to this important subject?—the most
important that can engage her attention!

380. _What is the usual age for Chlorosis to occur, and what are the
symptoms?_

Chlorosis more frequently attacks girls from fifteen to twenty years of
age; although unmarried women, much older, occasionally have it. I say
_unmarried_, for, as a rule, it is a complaint of the _single_.

The patient, first of all, complains of being languid, tired, and out of
spirits: she is fatigued with the slightest exertion: she has usually
palpitation of the heart (so as to make her fancy that she has a disease
of that organ, which, in all probability, she has _not_); she has
shortness of breath, and a short dry cough; her face is flabby and pale;
her complexion gradually assumes a yellowish or greenish hue—hence the
name of chlorosis; there is a dark, livid circle around her eyes: her
lips lose their color, and become almost white; her tongue is generally
white and pasty; her appetite is bad, and is frequently depraved—the
patient often preferring chalk, slate-pencil, cinder, and even dirt, to
the daintiest food; indigestion frequently attends chlorosis; she has
usually pains over the short-ribs, on the _left_ side; she suffers
greatly from “wind,” and is frequently nearly choked by it; her bowels
are generally costive, and the stools are unhealthy; she has pains in
her hips, loins, and back; and her feet and ankles are oftentimes
swollen. _The menstrual discharge is either suspended, or very partially
performed_; if the latter, it is usually almost colorless. Hysterical
fits not unfrequently occur during an attack of chlorosis.

381. _How may Chlorosis be prevented?_

If health were more and fashion were less studied, chlorosis would not
be such a frequent complaint. This disease generally takes its rise from
mismanagement—from Nature’s laws having been set at defiance. I have
heard a silly mother express an opinion that it is not _genteel_ for a
girl to eat _heartily_! Such language is perfectly absurd and cruel. How
often, too, a weak mother declares that a healthy, blooming girl looks
like a milkmaid! It would be well if she did! How true and sad it is,
that “a pale, delicate face, and clear eyes, indicative of consumption,
are the fashionable _desiderata_ at present for complexion.”

A growing girl requires _plenty_ of _good_ nourishment—as much as her
appetite demands; and if she have it not, she will become either
chlorotic, or consumptive, or delicate. Besides, _the greatest
beautifier in the world is health_; therefore, by a mother studying the
health of her daughter, she will, at the same time, adorn her body with
beauty! I am sorry to say that too many parents think more of the beauty
than of the health of their girls. Sad and lamentable infatuation!
Nathaniel Hawthorne gives a graphic description of a delicate young
lady. He says: “She is one of those delicate, nervous young creatures
not uncommon in New England, and whom I suppose to have become what we
find them by the gradually refining away of the physical system among
young women. Some philosophers choose to glorify this habit of body by
terming it spiritual; but, in my opinion, it is rather the effect of
unwholesome food, bad air, lack of out-door exercise, and neglect of
bathing, on the part of these damsels and their female progenitors, all
resulting in a kind of hereditary dyspepsia.”

Nathaniel Hawthorne, a distinguished American, was right. Such ladies,
when he wrote, were not uncommon: but within the last two or three
years, to their great credit be it spoken, “a change has come o’er the
spirit of their dreams,” and they are wonderfully improved in health;
for, with all reverence be it spoken, “God helps them who help
themselves,” and they have helped themselves by attending to the rules
of health: “The women of America are growing more and more handsome
every year for just this reason. They are growing rounder of chest,
fuller of limb, gaining substance and development in every direction.
Whatever may be urged to the contrary, we believe this to be a
demonstrable fact.... When the rising generation of American girls once
begin to wear thick shoes, to take much exercise in the open air, to
skate, to play croquet, and to affect the saddle, it not only begins to
grow more wise but more healthful, and—which must follow as the night
the day—more beautiful.”

If a young girl had plenty of wholesome meat, varied from day to day,
either plain roast or boiled, and neither stewed, nor hashed, nor highly
seasoned, for her stomach; if she had an abundance of fresh air for her
lungs; if she had plenty of active exercise, such as skipping, dancing,
running, riding, swimming, for her muscles; if her clothing were warm
and loose, and adapted to the season; if her mind were more occupied
with active, _useful_ occupation, such as household work, than at
present, and if she were kept calm and untroubled from the hurly-burly
and excitement of fashionable life,—chlorosis would almost be an unknown
disease. It is a complaint of rare occurrence with country girls, but of
great frequency with fine city ladies.

382. _What treatment should you advise?_

The treatment which would prevent should be adopted when the complaint
first makes its appearance. If the above means do not quickly remove
it, the mother must then apply to a medical man, and he will give
medicines _which will soon have the desired effect_. If the disease be
allowed for any length of time to run on, it might produce either
organic—incurable—disease of the heart, or consumption, or
indigestion, or confirmed ill health.

383. _At what period of life is a lady most prone to Hysterics, and what
are the symptoms?_

The time of life when hysterics occur is generally from the age of
fifteen to fifty. Hysterics come on by paroxysms—hence they are called
hysterical fits. A patient, just before an attack, is low spirited:
crying without a cause; she is “nervous,” as it is called; she has
flushings of the face; she is at other times very pale; she has
shortness of breath and occasional palpitations of the heart; her
appetite is usually bad; she passes quantities of colorless limpid
urine, having the appearance of pump water; she is much troubled with
flatulence in her bowels, and, in consequence, she feels bloated and
uncomfortable. The “wind” at length rises upward toward the stomach, and
still upward to the throat, giving her the sensation of a ball stopping
her breathing, and producing a feeling of suffocation. The sensation of
a ball in the throat (_globus hystericus_) is the commencement of the
fit.

She now becomes _partially_ insensible, although she seldom loses
_complete_ consciousness. Her face becomes flushed, her nostrils
dilated, her head thrown back, and her stomach and bowels enormously
distended with “wind.” After a short time she throws her arms and legs
about convulsively, she beats her breast, tears her hair and clothes,
laughs boisterously, and screams violently; at other times she makes a
peculiar noise; sometimes she sobs, and her face is much distorted. At
length she brings up enormous quantities of wind; after a time, she
bursts into a violent flood of tears, and then gradually comes to
herself.

As soon as the fit is at an end she generally passes enormous quantities
of colorless limpid urine. She might, in a short time, fall into another
attack similar to the above. When she comes to herself she feels
exhausted and tired, and usually complains of slight headache, and of
great soreness of the body and limbs. She seldom remembers what has
occurred during the fit. Hysterics are sometimes frightful to witness;
but, in themselves, are not at all dangerous.

384. _What are the causes of Hysterics?_

Delicate health, chlorosis, improper and not sufficiently nourishing
food, grief, anxiety, excitement of the mind, closely confined rooms,
want of exercise, indigestion, flatulence, and tight lacing are the
causes which usually produce hysterics. Hysterics are frequently
feigned; indeed, oftener than any other complaint; and even a _genuine_
case is usually much aggravated by a patient herself giving way to them.

385. _What do you recommend an Hysterical lady to do?_

To improve her health by proper management; to rise early and to take a
walk, that she may breathe pure and wholesome air,—indeed, she ought to
live nearly half her time in the open air, exercising herself with
walking, skipping, etc.; to employ her mind with botany, croquet,
archery, or with any other out-door amusement; to confine herself to
plain, wholesome, nourishing food; to avoid tight lacing; to eschew
fashionable amusements; and, above all, not to give way to her feelings,
but if she feel an attack approaching, to rouse herself.

_If the fit be upon her_, the better plan is to banish all the _male_
sex from the room, and not even to have many women about her, and for
those around to loosen her dress; to lay her in the center of the room,
flat upon the ground, with a pillow under her head; to remove combs and
pins and brooches from her person; to dash cold water upon her face; to
apply cloths, or a large sponge wetted in cold water, to her head; to
throw open the window, and then to leave her to herself; or at all
events, to leave her with only one _female_ friend or attendant. If such
be done, she will soon come round; but what is the usual practice? If a
girl be in hysterics, the whole house, and perhaps the neighborhood, is
roused; the room is crowded to suffocation; fears are openly expressed
by those around that she is in a dangerous state; she hears what they
say, and her hysterics are increased tenfold.

                  *       *       *       *       *

If this book is to be of use to mothers and to the rising generation, as
I humbly hope and trust that it has been, and that it will be still more
abundantly, it ought not to be listlessly read, merely as a novel, or as
any other piece of fiction, but it must be thoughtfully and carefully
studied, until its contents, in all its bearings, be completely mastered
and understood.

In conclusion, I beg to thank you for the courtesy, confidence, and
attention I have received at your hands, and to express a hope that my
advice, through God’s blessing, may not have been given in vain.




                                 INDEX.


 Ablution of a child, 108

 Ablution of an infant, 19

 Ablution of a youth, 274

 Ablution, thorough, of a boy and girl, 274

 Accidents of children, 256

 Acne, or red pimples, symptoms and treatment of, 335

 Advice to a mother if her infant be poorly, 105

 Advice to _Mr. Paterfamilias_, 163

 Ailments, the distinction between _serious_ and _slight_, 79

 Ailments, slight, of infants, 77

 Air and exercise for youth, 290

 Air, the importance of good, 134

 Air, the necessity of fresh, and changing the, 134

 American ladies, health and beauty of, 342

 Amusements for a child, 155

 Amusements for a girl, 296

 Amusements for a boy, 294

 Ankles, of a babe, weak, 104

 Antipathies of a child, 132

 Aperients for a child, 221

 Aperients, the effect of, on an infant, 83

 Aperients, the effect of, on a new-born babe, 78

 Aperients, the effect of, on a youth, 331

 Aperients, danger in frequent use of, 331

 Appeal to mothers, 334

 Appetite, on a child losing his, 130

 Applications, warm external, 254

 Apron to wear when washing, 25

 Archery, croquet, skating, etc., 296

 Arnold, Dr., on corporal punishment, 300

 Arrow-root, the use of, for an infant, 40

 Artificial food for an infant, 36

 Asses’ milk more suitable for the delicate, 44


 Babes should kick about on the floor, 70

 Baby-slaughter, or “massacre of the innocents”, 43

 Baked crumb of bread for an infant, 37

 Baked flour for an infant, 38

 Bakers’ and home-made bread, 132

 Band, when to discontinue the use of, 30

 Bathing after a _full_ meal, 279

 Baths, cold, tepid and warm, 280

 Baths, warm, instead of cordials and carminatives, 88

 Beard as a respirator, covering and improvement, 326

 Bed, on placing the child in his, 165

 Beds, feather, ill effects of, 164

 Beds, cleansing and purification of, 206

 Bed-rooms, the ventilation of, 308

 Bed-rooms should be cool, 166

 Bed-rooms, a plan to ventilate, 308

 Bee, best application for the sting of a, 268

 Beef, salted or boiled, 126

 Belladonna, poisoning by, 270

 Beverage for a child, 127

 “Black eye,” remedies for a, 257

 Bleeding of infant, how nurse can restrain, 27

 Bleeding, violent, from the nose, 328

 Blood, the spitting of, 332

 Blows and bruises of child, 256

 Boarding-schools for females, 301

 Boarding-schools, remarks on cheap, 303

 Boiled bread for infants, 36

 Boiled flour for infants’ food, 37

 Boils, the best application for, 218

 Boots and shoes for the prevention of corns, 339

 Bottles, the use of, in giving artificial food, 40

 Boulogne sore throat, or diphtheria, 188

 Bow legs, the causes and treatment of, 239

 Bowels, care in regard to, 76

 Bowels, large, of children, 220

 Bowels, various symptoms in regard to, 90

 Bowels, the protrusion of lower, 223

 Boys should be made strong, 295

 Brain, symptoms of water on the, 173

 Bran, for the purpose of softening water, 242

 Bran poultices, best way to make, 256

 Breakfast of a child, what should be the, 120

 Breakfast of a youth, in regard to the, 286

 Breathing exercise, the desirability of, 295

 Brimstone and treacle, the giving of, 225

 Brown and Polson’s Corn Flour, 39

 Bronchitis, the care and treatment of, 186

 Broth, the use of, for infants, 103

 Broth, the use of, for a quite young infant, 40

 Broth and soup, wholesomeness of, 288

 Brothers and sisters, association of, 302

 Bruises, immediate remedies for, 256

 Burns and scalds, which most dangerous, 261

 Burning, danger of, among females, 135

 Bullying and snubbing of a child, 146

 Butter, wholesomeness and advantage of, 120


 Calomel, the danger of a mother prescribing, 86

 Calomel, the ill effects of, 331

 Camphor makes teeth brittle, 314

 Caning and flogging of a boy, 298

 Caps, flannel, the necessity of, 29

 Carpets in nurseries, the effects of using, 150

 Carriage exercise, the advantages of, 293

 Carron oil in burns, value of, 263

 Castor oil, its effects as a healer, 87

 Cat, bites and scratches of a, 268

 Chafings, the best treatment of, 80

 Chairs, the use of straight-backed, 304

 Change of air, the effect of, 227

 Change of linen in sickness, 230

 Chapped hands and limbs of a child, 242

 Chapped lips, excellent application for, 243

 Chest, keeping warm the upper part of the, 283

 “Chicken-breasted” and narrow-breasted children, 207

 Chicken-pox, nature and symptoms of, 223

 Chilblains, the way to prevent and cure the, 241

 Child, when he should commence to dine with his parents, 133

 “Child-crowing,” the perilous disorder of, 179

 “Child-crowing,” the treatment of a paroxysm of, 181

 Children’s hour, the right method at, 142

 Children’s parties, the great follies of, 159

 Chimneys, on the stopping of, 150, 229

 Chiropodists, the great want of respectable, 338

 Chlorosis, causes, symptoms and cure of, 340, 341

 Chlorosis is rare in rural districts, 343

 “Choking,” what is to be done in a case of, 265

 Cisterns, the best kind of, 127

 Clothes, on airing an infant’s, 32

 Clothes, the ill effects of tight, 111

 Clothing, the proper, for children, 111

 Clothing, the best kind, for infants, 30

 Clothing, the proper kind, during winter, 32

 Clothing, the proper kind, for youths, 282

 Coffee as an aperient, the use of, 245, 286

 Coffee and tea, 286

 Coin, on the swallowing of a, 272

 Cold bed-room healthy, 167

 Cold, a feverish, the best course in case of, 255

 Cold, on child always catching, 228

 Cold feet, method to warm, 142

 Concluding remarks on infancy, 106

 Constipation, prevention and cure of, 331

 Consumption attacks the _upper_ part of the lungs, 283

 Consumption, the age at which it usually appears, 321

 Consumption, the causes of, 323

 Consumption, the death-rate, 321

 Consumption, importance of early consulting a medical man in, 320

 Consumption, spitting of blood in, 320

 Consumption, the symptoms attending, 321

 Consumptive patient, the treatment of a, 324

 Convulsions of children, 61, 81

 Convulsions from hooping-cough, 82

 Cooked fruit for child, the wholesomeness of, 120

 Coroners’ inquests on infants, 75

 Corporal punishment at schools, 298

 Corns, their nature, cause and best remedy, 337, 338

 Costiveness in the young, the means to prevent, 86

 Costiveness, the best remedies for, 82

 Costiveness, the reason why so prevalent, 334

 Cough, the danger of stopping a, 68

 Cow, the importance of having the milk from ONE, 41, 45

 Cream and egg, the advantages of, 121

 Cream and water for a babe, 121

 Crinoline and the danger to ladies, 135

 Croquet for girls, the amusement of, 296

 Crossness in a sick child, proper treatment of, 232

 Croup, the times for and dangers of, 175

 Croup, the treatment of, 176

 Cry of an infant, the language in the, 103

 Cure, artificial and natural, means of, 239

 “Curious phenomenon” in scarlet fever, 197

 Cut finger, the best application for, 256


 Dancing and skipping, the benefits of, 295

 Danger of constantly giving physic, 106

 Delicate child, plan to strengthen a, 226

 Dentition, the period when begins, 58

 Dentition, the lancing of gums in, 60

 Dentition, the period of second, 169

 Dentition, symptoms and treatment of painful, 66

 Diarrhœa in infants, the symptoms of, 90

 Diarrhœa in infants, the treatment of, 92

 Diet of a child who has cut his teeth, 120

 Diet of children generally, 118

 Diet of a child raised on artificial food, 44

 Diet of a child turned from the natural food, 51

 Diet of infants, 33

 Diet, on a mother being particular in attending to, 126

 Diet of youth, breakfast, 286

 Dietary, an infant’s, 36

 Dinner for a child, 119

 Dinner for a youth, 287

 Diphtheria, symptoms, causes and treatment of, 188–193

 Dirty child, a, the mother’s disgrace, 77

 Diseased nature and strange eruptions, 250

 Diseases of children and the symptoms, 170

 Diseases of girls, and the causes and symptoms, 340

 Diseases of infants and symptoms, 77

 Diseases in children, causes of obscure, 244

 Diseases, the prevention of, 315

 Diseases produced by tight lacing, 284

 Diseases, symptoms of _serious_, 79

 Doctor, on early calling in the, 253

 Dog supposed to be mad, the bite of a, 266

 Doleful child, the sight of a, 139

 Drainage of the house and neighborhood, 136, 206

 Dress, female, health and fashion in, 285

 Dress of a child while asleep, 73

 Drinking fountains a great boon, 128

 Dropping a child, danger of injury in, 258

 Dry-raised children, the best food for, 45

 “Dusting material” for infants, old-fashioned, 23

 Dysentery, symptoms and treatment of, 93–97


 Ear, nature and treatment of discharges from the, 220

 Ear, removal of a pea or bead from the, 271

 Earache, best treatment of the, 219

 Earwig in the ear of a child, 272

 Early rising, benefit of, 167, 311

 Education of children, best plan of, 161

 Education in infant schools, 160

 Education, home, the best for girls, 301

 Education, modern, the best, 301

 Education for youth, plan of, 298

 Eggs for children, the use of, 126

 Enema apparatus an important requisite, 226

 Engravings and paintings should be hung in nurseries, 137

 Eruptions about the mouth, 249

 Excoriations, applications for, 24

 Excoriations, the best remedy for, 24

 Exercise in the open air, 69, 151, 290

 Exercise the best composing medicine, 290

 Exercise, importance of, for children, 151

 Exercise in wet weather, 153

 Exercise, on violently tossing infants for, 70

 Exercise, horse and pony, for boys and girls, 292

 Exercise, an infant himself taking, 69

 Exercise, the best, for youth, 291


 Fecal matter in pump water, 206

 Fainting, in case of a young lady, 329

 Fainting from unhealthy condition, 330

 Fainting from general debility, 330

 Fainting from a disordered stomach, 330

 Falling-off of hair, to prevent, 282

 Falls on the head, the best course in case of, 257

 Fashion, dangerous effects of strictly attending to, 285

 Fashion, the present, of dressing children, 117

 Fashionable _desiderata_ for complexion, 342

 Favoritism both hurtful and wrong, 147

 Feeding of infants, proper time to begin the, 42

 Feeding of infants, proper intervals for the, 42

 Feet, remedy for smelling, 339

 Feet, remedy for sweating, 339

 Feet, remedy for tender, 339

 Female dress in ball-room, 285

 Fire, on a child playing with, 260

 Fire, danger of sitting with the back to, 136

 Fire, the use of, in night nursery, 166

 Fire, the manner of extinguishing, if clothes be on, 260

 Fire-guards, the use of, 135, 260

 Fire-proof, dresses can be made perfectly, 261

 Flannel night-gowns, the wearing of, 113

 Flannel shirts for a delicate child, 113

 Flannel waistcoats, nothing equal to, 282

 Fleas, best way to drive away, 235

 Flute, bugle and other wind instruments, 296

 Fly-pole as an exercise for the muscles, 297

 Fog, on sending child out in, 153

 Folly of giving physic after vaccination, 57

 Food, artificial, while using the natural, 42

 Food, care in preparing infants’, 40

 Food for infants artificially fed, 36, 44

 Food for infants naturally fed, 36

 Frightening a child should never be indulged in, 140

 Fruit, as an aperient, 222


 Garters impede the circulation, 114

 Gin or peppermint in infants’ food, 51

 Giving joy to a child, 143

 Glass, a child swallowing broken, 272

 Gluttony kills more than the sword, 290

 Glycerin soap, an excellent remedy, 242

 Goat’s milk as a substitute, 44

 _Godfrey’s Cordial_ as a remedy, 88

 Godfrey’s Cordial, poisoning by, treatment in case of, 269

 Grazed skin, the best application for a, 269

 Great desideratum, 77

 Green dresses are poisonous, 137, 286

 Green paper-hangings for nurseries objectionable, 137

 “Gripings,” symptoms, causes and treatment of, 89

 “Gross superstition,” usual style of, 199

 Gums, the lancing of the, 60

 Gum-boil, cause and treatment of a, 336

 Gum-sticks, the best of, 62

 Gymnasium, the value of a, 295


 Hair, the best application for the, 282

 Hair, to perfume the, 282

 Hair, plan of making tidy the, 281

 Half-washed and half-starved child, the, 155

 Hand-swing, the, a capital exercise, 296

 Happiness to a child, importance of, 143

 Happy, how to make a child, 143

 Hards’ Farinaceous Food, 38

 Hardening of children’s constitutions, 113

 Hardening of infants, the, 71

 Hats for a child, the best kind of, 112

 Hawthorne, Nathaniel, on American ladies, 342

 Head, if a child fall upon his, 257

 Heat, external application of, 254

 Hiccoughs of infants, causes of, 90

 Hints conducive to the well-doing of a child, 139

 Home of childhood—the nursery, 139

 Hooping-cough, brief history of, 210

 Hooping-cough an obstinate disease, 215

 Hooping-cough, the treatment of, 212

 Horse exercise for boys or girls, 292

 Horse and pony exercise, 292

 Hot water bag or bottle, the use of a, 254

 Household work for girls as a means of health, 305

 Hydrophobia, antidote for, 266

 Hysterics, when a lady is most prone to, 344, 346


 India-rubber hot water bottle, use of an, 254

 Infants and the use of aperients, 77

 Infants should be encouraged to use exertion, 69

 Infants, about the weight of, 74

 Infant schools, health in, 160

 Infant, wheezing of an, 77

 Ipecacuanha wine, preservation of, 179


 Ladies “affecting the saddle”, 296

 Laudanum, treatment in case of poisoning by, 269

 Law, physic and divinity, 306

 Leaden cisterns, using water from, 127

 Learning without health, 237

 Leech-bites, the way to restrain bleeding from, 105

 Lessons, confining a child to his, 158

 Lice on the head after illness, 234

 Light, best artificial, for nursery, 138

 Light, the importance of, to health, 138

 Lime in the eye, to remove, 264

 Lime to harden the bones, 248

 Lime-water and milk, the use of, 125

 Love of children, the results of, 144

 Lucifer matches, the poisonous effects of, 138, 260

 Luncheon for a child, the, 125

 Lungs, inflammation of the, 113, 181

 Lungs, inflammation of, precautions to prevent, 236

 Lungs, inflammation of, symptoms of, 181

 Lungs, inflammation of, treatment of, 182

 Lying lips of a child, the, 147


 Mad dog, the bite of a, 266

 Mad dog, a description of a, 267

 Magnesia to cool a child, 87

 Manner and proper time for turning a child to artificial food, 50, 51

 Many die under five years of age, 43

 Mattresses, horse-hair, best for a child, 164

 Meals should be varied, a child’s, 128

 Measles described, the symptoms of, 193

 Measles and scarlet fever, the, 196

 Measles, the treatment of the, 194

 Meat, daily, on giving a boy, 287

 Meat, raw, in long-standing disease, 227

 Meat, in exhaustive diseases, 227

 Meat, when a child should commence taking, 118

 Meddlesome treatment of wiseacres, 250

 Medical man, a mother’s treatment toward the, 250

 Medicine, the best way of administering, 228

 Medicine, on giving new-born infants, 78

 Medicine, on making palatable, 229

 Mercury, on the danger of parents giving, 85, 331

 Milk, on the importance of having it from ONE cow, 36, 45

 Milk, bad, very nasty, 123

 Milk for babe indispensable, 46

 Milk, or meat, or both, 124

 Milk, a plan to make a child take, 124

 Milk, the value of, for children, 121

 Milk, a way to prevent, turning sour, 125

 Milk-crust, a troublesome complaint, 249

 Mismanaged, children, through want of instruction, 18

 Modified small-pox and chicken-pox, 209

 Mother, fretting, injurious to infant, 50

 Mother, a foolish, course of, 75

 Mother, the, of many diseases, 324

 Mother should supervise the mixing of milk, 36

 Motions, to understand the, of children, 90

 Mumps, the best treatment of, 217


 Nature’s remedies the best, 106

 Nervous and unhappy young ladies, 340

 Nettle-rash, its symptoms and the best treatment, 97

 Night-terrors, best treatment of, 141

 Nose, removal of foreign substances from, 271

 Nose, bleeding from, means to restrain, 328

 Nurse, on the choice of a, 139

 Nurse, the acts of a lazy, 142

 Nurse, the value of a strong and active, 140

 Nurse, a young, not desirable, 140

 Nurse, the kind of, for the sick, 232

 Nursery-basin, the employment of a, 20

 Nursery a child’s own domain, 139, 157

 Nursery, selection, warming, ventilation, arrangements of, 133

 Nursery of a sick child, 229

 Nursery, on the light of a, 138

 Nursery, a, must be airy, 133

 Nursery, further observations in regard to a, 134

 Nursery, windows to be often opened in a, 138


 Opium, a case of poisoning by, 68

 Opium, the danger of administering, to infants, 88

 Opium, the treatment of poisoning by, 269

 Over-education among children, 161

 Over-feeding with artificial food, 87


 Paint-boxes dangerous as toys, 158

 Peevishness of a child, the plan to allay, 144

 Perambulators, the use of, 152

 Pies and puddings, the nature of, 119

 Pimples of the face, treatment of, 335

 Pin, on a child’s swallowing a, 272

 Play, a course of education in, 162

 Play and useful knowledge, 160

 Play-grounds for children, 160

 Pleasant words to a child, importance of, 146

 Poisoning, accidental, 269

 Poisoning a child with his breath, 165

 Poppy-syrup, injurious effects of, 88

 Pork an improper meat for children, 125

 Position of a sleeping child, 166

 Potatoes for children, the use of, 126

 Poultice, a celebrated white-bread, 255

 Powder, “dusting,” the best, 23

 Precocity of intellect, 315

 Precocious youths, the health of, 316

 Princess of Wales and her child, 24

 Professions and trades, choice of, 305

 Proper management of infants, 106

 Proper persons to wash an infant, 24

 Proper position of child in sleep, 239

 Prunes, the best way of stewing, 222

 Profession or trade, choice of, for delicate youth, 305

 Profession or trade, delicate youths should be brought up to, 306

 Puddings for children, the use of, 119


 Quack Medicines, the danger in, 88

 Quacking an infant, the habit of, 86

 Quicklime in the eye, 264


 Red-gum, the symptoms and treatment of, 98

 Regularity of habits among the young, 332, 334

 Respiration, products of, poisonous, 309

 Rest, the best time for a child to retire to, 165

 Revaccination, importance of, 54

 Revaccination every seven years, 54

 Rheumatic fever, flannel vest and drawers in, 283

 Ribs, bulging out of the, 319

 Rice, prepared as an infant’s food, 39

 Richardson, Dr., the ether spray of, 328

 Rickets, the nature and effects of, 245

 Rickets, the various degrees of, 246

 Rocking-chairs, and rockers to the cradle, 72

 Rocking infants to sleep, 72

 Rooms, ill effects of dark, 138

 Round shoulders, cause and treatment of, 238, 318

 Round-worm, nature and cure of, 243

 Running scall, description of and remedy for, 249

 Rupture through meddlesomeness, 27

 Rupture, nature and best treatment, 28, 29

 Rusks, boiled, as food, 38


 Sallowness, cause of, in young girls, 290

 Salt water and fresh water, 279

 Salt should be added to an infant’s food, 42

 Salt, bag of hot, use of a, 254

 Salt necessary to human life, 245

 Salt meats for children, 125

 Salt and water ablutions for a delicate child, 110

 Salt and water for teeth and gums, 313

 Scalds and burns, which most dangerous, 261

 Scalds of mouth and throat, 261

 Scarlatina, the nature of, 190

 Scarlet fever, the symptoms of, 196

 Scarlet fever, the contagion of, 205

 Scarlet fever, the danger of giving aperients in, 196

 Scarlet fever, the dropsy of, 197, 205

 Scarlet fever, management of child after, 205

 Scarlet fever and measles, the importance of distinguishing between,
    197

 Scarlet fever, the principal danger in, 197

 Scarlet fever, the purification of the house after, 206

 Scarlet fever, the treatment of, 198

 Schools, observations upon female boarding, 301

 Schools, observations upon public, 300

 Screaming in sleep, children, 216

 Scrofula, how to ward off, 316

 Scrofula, the prevention of, 316

 Scurfy head, a remedy for, 109

 Sea-bathing and fresh-water bathing, 279

 Sea-bathing for a young child, 228

 Secrets, talking, before a child, 163

 Selection of females for nourishing children, 46

 Senna as an aperient, 221

 Shivering fit, importance of attending to a, 215

 Shivering fit, treatment of a, 216

 Shoes, plan to water-proof, 283

 Shoes preferable to boots, 115

 Shoes and stockings for children and youths, 114, 283

 Shoes, the ill effects of tight, 114

 “Shortening” an infant, 33

 Shoulder-blades “growing out”, 238

 Sick child, the nursing of a, 229

 Sick child not to be stuffed with food, 232

 Sick-room, management of the, 229

 Sickness of infants, injurious effects of, 99

 Singed rag for wrapping, 26

 Singing and reading aloud, 298

 Singing beneficial to a child, 164

 Single-stick, the game of, 294

 Sitting with the back to fire, 135

 Sitz bath both useful and valuable, 225

 Skating for boys and girls, 297

 Skin, grazed, application for, 269

 Sleeping-rooms, importance of well ventilating, 309

 Sleep, the, of children, 164

 Sleep, the, of infants, 71

 Sleep in middle of day beneficial, 164

 Sleep, much, necessary for infants, 74

 Sleep, temperature of infants’ bed-room during, 71

 Sleep, right time of putting a child to, 165

 Sleep, rocking infants to, 72

 Sleep of youth, and early rising, 311

 Slight attack not to be interfered with, 91

 Slippers, the best for sick-room, 233

 Small-pox, the ravages of, 53

 Small-pox, a pest and disgrace, 54

 Small-pox, when modified, 207

 Small-pox, when in the neighborhood, 55

 Small-pox, to prevent pitting of, 240

 Smothering of infants, the cause of, 75

 Socks and stockings for a child, 115

 Soda, ill effects of washing clothes with, 24

 Sounds, joyful, for every ear, 144

 Soups and broths, 287

 Speak gently to a child, 145

 Spencer, a knitted worsted, 31

 Spine, in case of injury to the, 258

 Spine, lateral curvature of the, 319

 Spines, causes of distorted, 164, 319

 Spines twisted from rapid growing, 238

 Spirits, deadly effects of, to the young, 288

 Spitting of blood, 320, 322

 Spitting of blood, precautions against, 324

 Spurious croup sometimes mistaken for the genuine, 179

 Stammering, cause of, 148

 Stammering, cure of, 149

 Stays, the ill effects of, 284

 Stillness of the sick-room, 233

 Sting of the bee or wasp, 268

 Stir-about and milk, well-boiled oatmeal, 121

 Stockings and shoes, 114, 283

 Stooping in a girl, evil effects of, 318

 Stopping of chimneys, 150, 229

 Stuffing a sick child with food, 232

 “Stuffing of the nose” of infants, 98

 “Sty,” treatment of the, 220

 Suet-pudding, the nature of, 119

 Sugar for infants, 42, 52

 Sugar confectionery for infants, 131

 Sugar, _raw_, as an aperient, 52

 Sunstroke, prevention of, 112

 Sunday, children should not regard as a day of gloom, 159

 Supper for a child and for a youth, 128, 289

 Surfeit water and saffron tea, 194

 Sweetmeats colored with poisonous pigments, 131

 Swimming, on boys and girls, 278

 Symptoms of _serious_ diseases, 170


 Tape-worm, the effect on children of, 244

 Taste for things refined and beautiful, 138

 Tea, on giving a child, 131

 Tea, green, the ill effects of, 131, 289

 Teeth, attention to, importance of, 313

 Teeth, child should not have meat until he has cut several, 118

 Teeth, the diet of a child who has cut all his, 118

 Teeth and gums, to keep in a healthy state the, 313

 Teeth, right way of brushing the, 314

 Teeth, appearance and number of _first_ set of, 59

 Teeth, appearance and number of _second_ set of, 169

 Teeth, the second crop of, 169

 Teething, the time at which children begin, 58

 Teething, eruptions from, 68

 Teething the frequent cause of sickness, 99

 Teething, a fruitful source of disease, 64

 Teething, plan to be adopted during, 67

 Teething, restlessness from, 253

 Teething, _second_, importance of care, 170

 Teething, symptoms and treatment of painful, 66

 Teething, in town and country, 67

 Temperature and ventilation of a nursery, 133

 Temperature of a warm bath, 254

 Thread or maw-worm, and its causes, 213

 Throats, sore, precautions to prevent, 325

 Thrush, cause, symptoms, prevention and cure of, 100

 Thumb, the best gum-stick in the world, 62

 Tight bands, belts and hats, 111

 Tight lacing, the ill effects of, 284

 Times for feeding an infant, 35

 Tobacco smoking for boys, 327

 Tobacco smoking, cases illustrating the danger of, 327

 Toe-nails, the right way of cutting, 116

 Tongue-tied, to ascertain if an infant be, 34

 “Tooth-cough,” should anything be given in, 67

 Tooth-powder, an excellent, 313

 Top crust of bread as infant’s food, 38

 Tous-les-mois, 37

 Toys, children’s, 158

 Toys painted with arsenic, 137, 158

 Trade or profession for a delicate youth, 308

 Treatment of the delicate, 226

 Treatment of some urgent serious diseases, 79, 171

 Truth, the love of, 147

 Tub, commencement of washing an infant in a, 20

 Tumbling and rolling of a child, 154


 Vaccination, the advantages of, 53

 Veal for a child, the objection to, 126

 Vegetables for a child, 126

 Ventilation, and on stopping of chimneys, 150, 230

 Ventilation and sleep, 308

 Ventilation of a nursery, 134

 Violet powder, to make, 23


 Walking, on the early, of infants, 151

 Walking exercise, value of, 291

 Walking in his sleep, a child, 168

 Warm baths for children, 253

 Warm external applications, 254

 Warts, the best remedy to destroy, 339

 Washing of a child, remarks upon the, 108

 Washing of an infant, remarks upon the, 19

 Washing a new-born infant’s head with brandy, 21

 Washing a nursery floor, 136

 Wasp, the sting of a, 268

 Water, on the importance of good, 127

 Water on the brain, 173

 Water, cold and warm, for ablution, 107

 Weather, on a child almost living in the air in fine, 153

 Weather, on sending the young out in wet, 153

 Wet flannel application, 255

 White lily leaf for bruises, 257

 Whom, and how, to nurse the young, 44

 Whom to select as a nurse for feeble children, 47

 Windows of a nursery should be large, 138

 Windpipe, foreign substance in the, 273

 Wine for children and youths, 130, 288

 Winter clothing, the time to leave off, 116

 Woolen garments, the use of, 113, 282


                                THE END.




                             TO THE READER.


Before presenting a few from the numerous commendations to this
invaluable work, we desire to furnish the _verbatim_ copy of an able
letter addressed to the editor by JOHN BELL, M.D., author of treatises
on “Baths” and “Mineral Waters,” “Regimen and Longevity,” “Health and
Beauty,” etc., etc. The eminent services, as an editor and author,
rendered by DR. BELL to the profession will cause his words to sink
deeply in the minds and hearts of thousands of parents and physicians,
who have alike been profited by his skill and wisdom.

                                                         THE PUBLISHERS.

                                           PHILADELPHIA, March 16, 1871.

  F. H. GETCHELL, M.D.

  DEAR DOCTOR:—I must compliment you on your neat Introduction as in
  itself a good summary, with additional enforcement, of the advice
  contained in the work of Dr. Chavasse on the “Physical Training of
  Children.” The author has been very successful in conveying much
  needed instruction in language clear, forcible and readily
  comprehended by every reader. Mothers, for whose benefit the work has
  been prepared, must feel, with it in hand, that they have gained a
  friendly, disinterested and wise counsellor to admonish and guide them
  in many trying emergencies to a proper physical management, and to
  some extent concurrent moral culture, of their offspring, from the
  first hour of infantile life, on through childhood, until the time for
  school education begins. Familiar truths are here presented with a
  freshness and piquancy which carry with them the renewed assent and
  conviction of those who deemed themselves possessed of the requisite
  knowledge, while by the larger number, the uninitiated into maternal
  cares and children’s wants, they cannot fail to be received as the
  utterances of wisdom and long experience. In his inculcations the
  author does not assume that a child is a mere machine, to be made to
  go through certain movements by an older controlling hand, nor that it
  is to be left, like a young plant, to grow up in fruitless luxuriance,
  without pruning or grafting. He favors a large charter for nature, but
  he dwells also on the existence of natural laws, growing out of the
  very framework and constitution of a living body, an infraction of
  which, whether it be through ignorance, pedantic teaching, fashion or
  the intrusion of physic, is followed by injury to health and
  happiness. A child is not to be treated as an automaton, but as a
  being whose physical and mental organization, instincts and germs of
  intelligence are to be gradually developed under careful training.
  Growth, health and flexibility of movements come first: polish and the
  graces may well be an afterthought. The first instinctive wants of an
  infant, the gratifying of which is necessary to its existence, are air
  to breathe, food to nourish, external warmth by suitable covering, and
  sleep to invigorate and refresh. It is now that the reason of the
  mother and of her immediate aids should be deliberately exercised in
  the regulation of these instincts. Selection and limitation of means
  for the purpose must be made, and the physical training of the infant
  is thus already begun. How important that this training should be
  conducted with a full knowledge of the necessities of the case! and
  yet it is this very knowledge that is so generally wanting, and which
  it is the great object of Dr. Chavasse to supply. His advice and
  directions to this end are full and explicit, minute without being
  tedious and plain without being trivial. All the deeds and
  contingencies of nursery-life are anticipated, and the treatment
  required in consequence is carefully detailed. The cardinal purposes
  of a sanitary teacher are to preserve the health of the child, to
  restore it when lost and to prevent disease. While giving full scope
  to the fulfilment of these purposes, the author admits, with reserve,
  the necessity of indicating the means of curing some of the ailments
  and chief diseases incident to childhood. He enjoins the mother to
  send for a physician as soon as the case requires medical aid, and he
  gives the additional and often-needed advice to abide strictly by the
  directions of her medical adviser. There are times, however, when the
  suddenness and violence of the attack and the inability to procure
  timely professional assistance throw the mother on her own resources,
  and it is under these circumstances that the author teaches her how to
  act and what prescriptions to give, but not without many cautions on
  his part. It must still be continually borne in mind that everything
  can be done in the way of prevention, and much in the way of cure, by
  a timely and judicious use of the ordinary hygienic means applied for
  the growth and preservation of the child, viz.: air, water, food,
  clothing, exercise of the body and nurture of the affections. The
  medicine-chest ought never to form part of the furniture of the
  nursery. Meddlesome medicine is bad, and that medicine is always
  meddlesome when it is applied without actual necessity, clearly
  indicated by a competent judge. The mother will find this judge in the
  author of the present volume.

  Especially to be commended are the sub-chapters on _The Nursery_,
  _Exercise_, _Amusements_ and _Education_, the mere reading of which by
  parents, and more particularly by mothers, cannot fail, while
  inculcating new duties on them, to call their affections into
  increased activity and extend their benevolent feeling to all who are
  placed under similar circumstances with themselves. Air and light and
  range for romps and games, pleasant words and nurture in love inspire
  children with joy and gladness, and parents, in reading these
  feelings, catch the soft contagion and become happier themselves in
  making their miniature second selves happy. In a subsequent part of
  the volume, under the head of “Boyhood and Girlhood,” additional
  advice is given on many of the topics which were detailed in reference
  to infant life. First among these is daily ablution in its full sense,
  including the use of the bath as “a grand requisite for health.” The
  transition from bathing to swimming is very natural and easy.
  “Swimming ought, then, to be a part and parcel of the education of
  every boy and girl.” In urging exercise and amusements for the young,
  and specifying many ways, including the gymnasium, dancing and
  skating, in which the desired object may be attained, the author could
  not fail to caution against the perversion of the pleasures of the
  dance by the too general accompaniments of tight dress in crowded
  rooms, impure air, late hours, over-exertion and rapid transitions of
  temperature, to which are too frequently added excesses in eating and
  the drinking of stimulating and intoxicating liquids. Children’s
  parties are properly stigmatized as disgusting and demoralizing.
  Schools come up for consideration, and most valuable advice and
  warning are given for the treatment of girls sent to these
  institutions. Physical education should always precede mental, and be
  continued with it. In a question between health and books, the former
  should always carry the day. “Unfortunately, in this enlightened age,
  we,” as the author justly remarks, “commence at the wrong end—we put
  the cart before the horse: we begin by cultivating the mind, and we
  leave the body to be taken care of afterward; the results are broken
  health, precocious, stunted and deformed youths, and premature decay.”
  All that is said in this volume on the subject of education is
  pertinent, suggestive and instructive, not only to mothers, but to all
  whose line of duty lies in training the young for the proper discharge
  of their duties in after life. Were I attempting to give an analysis
  of the work of Dr. Chavasse, I would have spoken first of his
  instructions on the topics of diet and clothing, which are quite
  comprehensive and adapted to the successive periods of infancy and
  childhood on to adolescence. Water for drink, milk as the staple food,
  “the most nourishing, wholesome and digestible,” ought to require no
  special recommendation did we not sometimes see the substitution by
  parents, intelligent in other respects, of beer and wine, and even
  diluted spirits, for beverage, and of highly seasoned dishes of meat,
  pastries, cakes, etc., for food. Of milk it is truly said that “the
  finest and the healthiest children are those who for the first four or
  five years of their lives are fed _principally_ upon it.” The use of
  light clothing with a view of hardening children is discountenanced,
  as it deserves to be, and the present fashion of dressing children
  meets the strongest censure, as being both adverse to health and
  furnishing early lessons of vanity. The clothing should be of such
  texture and material as to keep up the animal heat, and in a climate
  like ours, as indeed in all northern climates or those misnamed
  temperate, the vicissitudes of temperature in which are so great and
  frequent, woollen undergarments can rarely be dispensed with. To
  children, and invalids at all ages, they are indispensable. The dress,
  whatever may be the fashion, should be easy fitting, and this more
  particularly, as pointed out by the author, in the matter of shoes and
  boots, the undue tightness of which is an abomination only second to
  tight lacing of the chest and abdomen.

  Dr. Chavasse in the earlier editions of his work had carefully
  restricted himself to the domain of hygiene, and he was mainly induced
  to enlarge his teaching by the advice of Sir Charles Locock, in years
  gone by accoucheur to the queen. Following out this advice, he now
  gives, as already intimated, the treatment of some of the more urgent
  and serious diseases of infants and of children, to be carried out
  when a medical man cannot instantly be procured and when delay might
  be death. To a consideration of these he adds that of various ailments
  and of accidents, and thus enables the mother, with the assistance of
  discreet adults of the house, to have prompt recourse to the best
  means of treating them. The concluding section of the volume contains
  good and available advice for the prevention of diseases, the
  insidious approach of which makes it very necessary to detect their
  real character, and to adopt the best means of arresting farther
  progress, as in the instances of consumption and scrofula in both
  sexes, and curvature of the spine, most common in females.

  Where there is so much to commend in plan and execution of the work of
  Dr. Chavasse, I feel no inclination to hunt out minor defects, and can
  have no hesitation in proclaiming him to be one of our most successful
  co-laborers in the grand domain of hygiene, and particularly in his
  chosen department, the “Physical Training of Children.” I must, at the
  same time, congratulate you, my dear doctor, for your having selected
  such a worthy companion in a course of sanitary instruction which you
  are pursuing in connection with your more onerous professional
  engagements.

                                              Yours, sincerely,
                                                              JOHN BELL.

                  *       *       *       *       *

J. W. BRINTON, M.D., of Philadelphia, _Lecturer on Operative and Minor
Surgery to the Summer Course of the Jefferson Medical College, Surgeon
to St. Joseph’s Hospital, Surgeon to Philadelphia Hospital, etc., etc._,
in referring to PHYSICAL TRAINING OF CHILDREN, writes to the editor:

“The work seems to me an admirable one, and its suggestions, if
followed, must, I am sure, tend to prevent nursery mismanagement.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

REV. DANIEL MARCH, D.D., of Philadelphia, author of _Night Scenes in the
Bible_, _Our Fathers House_, _etc._, writes:

“I have been deeply interested in the title and contents of the work,
PHYSICAL TRAINING OF CHILDREN. The slight examination which I have made
of several chapters satisfies me that the subject has been treated with
great clearness, delicacy and discretion. The book will come as a
messenger of light, comfort and life to multitudes of homes. It will do
much not only to promote health and long life, but to secure the highest
enjoyment and the wisest improvement of life while it lasts. I wish it
might find a place in every American home.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

REV. ALFRED NEVIN, D.D., of Philadelphia, author of _A Popular
Commentary on Luke_, _The Churches of the Valley_, _A Guide to the
Oracles_, _etc., etc._, says:

“I have examined the PHYSICAL TRAINING OF CHILDREN sufficiently to
assure me that it would be a valuable acquisition to any family library
for constant and convenient reference. The _preventive_ suggestions
which it makes touching the influences and agencies which often damage,
if not destroy, the health of children, are of special importance. The
form of questions and answers, in which the instruction is embodied,
strikes me also as having many advantages. In addition to the intrinsic
merit of the book, the very handsome style in which it is published must
aid in giving it a wide circulation.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

HON. JOHN W. FORNEY, proprietor of the Philadelphia _Press_, and one of
the most distinguished editors of the country, pertinently says:

“I have examined the work, PHYSICAL TRAINING OF CHILDREN, and regard it
as exceedingly useful and interesting. It abounds in valuable
information, and I do most cheerfully commend it to the public.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHYSICAL TRAINING OF
CHILDREN ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
